Please read this
Dear student,
This Student Handbook is intended to provide IIT Madras BS Degree students with the
information and policies they should be aware of, which may help them make the most of
the opportunities offered in this programme. It also gives you formal notification and
explanation of the programme’s regulations, policies and procedures.
It is essential, and your responsibility, to read it and familiarize yourself with the content. It
should be kept handy and referred to during your time with us.
This handbook may be revised time and again. While this student handbook was prepared
on the basis of the best information available at the time of publication, all information,
including policies and procedures are subject to change without notice or obligation.
All rules and regulations in this document are approved by our committee. As changes keep
getting approved, we will update them here.
We hope that your time as a student in this programme is successful and enjoyable.
Thank you.
This document was last updated on June 7, 2024.
Table of Contents
A) Data Science & Applications 5
1. Highlights of the programme 5
2. Flexibility 5
3. Courses in the programme 6
3.1 Definition of credit in the program 6
3.2 Level 1: The Foundation level 6
3.3 Level 2: Diploma level 6
Diploma in Programming 6
Diploma in Data Science 6
3.4 Level 3: BSc Degree level courses 7
3.5 Level 4: BS Degree level courses 7
4. Fees for the entire programme 8
4.1 For students who are outside India: 10
5. Admission to the programme 10
5.1 Regular Entry into Foundation level 10
5.1.1 Eligibility to Apply for the Qualifier Exam 10
5.1.2 Preparation for the Qualifier exam 11
5.1.3 Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam 11
5.1.4 Criteria for passing the qualifier exam 12
5.1.5 Validity of the qualifier score 12
5.1.6 Communication about qualifier exam results 13
5.1.7 Second attempt: If a candidate was absent or failed the first attempt of qualifier exam
13
5.1.8 Candidates who did not become eligible for Qualifier exam 13

5.1.9 Options to register to courses once qualified 13
5.2 JEE-based Entry into Foundation Level 14
6. Credit Clearing Capability 14
7. Course registration - steps involved 15
8. Direct Entry into Diploma programme 16
8.1 Eligibility to Apply 16
8.2 Qualifying Process 16
Table 1: Department Core/Elective Courses 17
Table 2: SWAYAM NPTEL Courses Applicable for Department/Free Electives 18
Table 3: SWAYAM NPTEL courses Applicable under HS/MG category for crediting in the
BS level 18
9. Credit Transfer 18
Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses 18
Credit Transfer from courses that are conducted on IITM campus (**This will be in effect
from January 2024**) 19
10. Learner Life Cycle 20
11. Design of certificates for the 4 levels of the program 21
11.1 Mark transcripts 25
12. Academic aspects 25
12.1 Academic calendar 25
12.2 Course structure suitable for online delivery 27
12.3 Evaluation and grading of courses in every term 27
12.4 Pass criteria for each course 28
12.5 Repeating a course 29
12.5.1 Registering for Courses: Term 2 Onwards 30
12.5.2 Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade 30
12.5.3 Repeating a Course for Improvement 30
12.5.4 Make Up Exams 30
12.6 Dropping a course (This is not applicable for the students who are continuing after
qualifier in the same term) 32
13. Learning paths available 33
13.1 Prerequisite course requirements 34
Foundation courses 34
Diploma level courses 34
14. Changes in project grading (wef now) and Eligibility to enter the BSc Level (wef May
2024) 35
15. New Rules for Foundation & Diploma Level Completion 37
16. Eligibility Criteria Prize 38
17. Apprenticeship in the BS level of IIT Madras’ BS in Data Science and Applications 39
18. Software and Hardware Requirements - Mandatory System Specifications 41
Hardware 41
Software/Applications 41
Internet Bandwidth 42

For Online Interactions/Proctored Examinations 42
System compatibility test 42
Other References 42
BS in Data Science & Applications from IIT Madras
___________________________________________________
A) Data Science & Applications
IIT Madras has launched the BS in Data Science and Applications. In this program, the course
contents are delivered online and can be studied by anyone from anywhere, while the monthly
quizzes and final semester exams will have to be attended in-person at designated centres.
Depending on the number of courses completed, learners can earn
● a Foundation level certificate
● Diploma in Programming/Diploma in Data Science or both
● BSc degree in Programming and Data Science
● BS degree in Data Science and Applications
1. Highlights of the programme
Courses are taught by faculty of IIT Madras/other reputed institutes as well as experts from
the industry.
Unlike many competitive admission exams which work on the philosophy of elimination and
selection and admit a very limited number of learners into various programmes based on their
performance relative to that of others, in this programme there are specific qualifying criteria,
and a significantly large number of learners can enter.
Learners of any background, be it engineering, sciences, humanities, arts, medicine, law, etc
can attempt and join this programme.
There is no limitation on the age of the learner or their geographical location.
2. Flexibility
There are two entry and four exit points, with learners being able to exit with either course
certificates, or diploma or the degree. Learners can choose their pace of study every term.
Being an online programme, there is no geographical barrier to learning from this programme
- learners only need to travel to exam centres for exams each term.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE: This programme is NOT BASED on an admission process.
Qualified learners can attempt respective stages of the programme and those who clear each
stage will receive the certificate corresponding to that stage alone.
So, for example, the learner should be aware that they are not being admitted to a degree
programme after the Qualifier. It is only for the set of Foundation courses, which on
successful completion makes them eligible to enter the Diploma level. The diplomas or
degrees are obtained by the candidate only when the requisite number of credits are accrued
by completing the courses prescribed and satisfying any other mandatory criteria.
Admission to any level does not automatically entitle the learner to exit the programme with
the Diploma or the degree.
3. Courses in the programme
3.1 Definition of credit in the program

The credits here are based on the UGC system of counting 14 hours of learner engagement
as 1 credit. (1 credit mentioned here would be equivalent to 3 credits in the current IITM
campus Credit system.)
The number of credits required to graduate with the BSc is 114 while that for the BS is 142.
The structure of the program is as follows:
3.2 Level 1: The Foundation level
● Comprises 8 courses - English 1, English 2, Mathematics 1, Mathematics 2, Statistics
1, Statistics 2, Computational Thinking, Introduction to Python
● Number of credits: 32
3.3 Level 2: Diploma level
● Includes 2 Diplomas - Diploma in Programming and Diploma in Data Science
● Each diploma comprises 6 courses (23 credits) and 2 project courses (4 credits)
● Number of credits: 54
Diploma in Programming
● Database management systems (DBMS), Programming Data Structures and
Algorithms using Python (PDSA), Java programming, System Commands, Application
development - 1, Application Development - 2
● Project course in Application Development - 1
● Project course in Application Development - 2
Diploma in Data Science
● Machine Learning Foundations (MLF), Machine Learning Techniques (MLT), Machine
Learning Practice (MLP), Business Data Management (BDM), Business Analytics
(BA), Tools in Data Science (TDS)
● Project course in Business Data Management
● Project course in Machine Learning Practice
(Those students who fall short of the 54 credits in the Diploma level (temporary, for a few
students) will have to do additional courses in the BSc level to make up for the deficit in
credits. A student will be eligible for the BSc degree only if they complete 114 credits as per
the norms given.)
3.4 Level 3: BSc Degree level courses
● Total of 28 credits
● Mandatory 2 core pairs (Software Engineering, Software Testing, Artificial Intelligence
and Deep Learning)
● Mandatory course: Strategies for professional growth
● Maximum of 4 credits can be obtained from NPTEL, technical bucket
3.5 Level 4: BS Degree level courses
● Total of 28 credits
● Option of Apprenticeship - for 4/12 credits
● Mandatory to earn 4 credits from HS/MG stream, from NPTEL or program electives
● 2 level 4 courses in programming stream and 2 level 4 courses in the data science
stream should be mandatorily completed
Apprenticeship has been split into 2 courses - one of 4 credits that corresponds to the 4 month
internship and another as 8 credits for the term of apprenticeship that is continued from

months 5-8 in the same company and domain.
Apprenticeship is optional and one can earn 0/4/8/12 credits from it.
1. The list of courses in
a. Table 1: List of electives offered in the program
b. Table 2: List of NPTEL electives that can be credited at the BSc level
c. Table 3: List of HS/MG electives that can be credited from NPTEL
The list of courses in the 3 tables here are subject to periodic revision.
2. Refer Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses for process and credit transfer fee.
The course code defines the level of the course. If the course code is 2xxx,3xxx,4xxx then the
level of the course is 2/3/4 respectively.
The fee for the level 3 courses is Rs 2500/credit while that of level 4 courses is Rs 5000/credit.
4. Fees for the entire programme
● First year fees kept low to enable learners to try out the programme
● Entry fee for Qualifier exam: Rs. 3000 (non-refundable) - with suitable waivers
● Fee waivers for learners belonging to certain categories and economic backgrounds
Number of credits in each level:
Level Theory Project Apprenticeship NPTEL MG/HS/HM
Foundation 32
Diploma in DS 23 4
Diploma in P 23 4
BSc 28-X X (0-4)
BS 28-A-B A (0/4/12) B=4
*Only maximum of 24 credits can be transferred towards non counted CGPA
course
Foundation: Rs 32000/Diploma Level: 62500 x 2 = Rs 125,000/BSc Level: Rs 2.21L - 2.47L
BS Level: 3.25L - 3.87L
Cost per credit
(Rs)
Number of credits Total fee Level
fees
Foundation 1000/c 32c 32000 32,000
Diploma 2500/c for Theory
1250/c for project
23x2=46c
4x2 = 8c

115,000
10,000
125,000
BSc Level 3 - Rs 2500/c
Level 4 - Rs 5000/c
1000/c for NPTEL
20c for 5 mandatory courses (Level 3)
4c NPTEL+4c Level 3
4c NPTEL + 4c Level 4
8c Level 3
4c Level 3 + 4c Level 4
8c Level 4
50000
4000+10000
4000+20000
20000
30000
40000
64,000
74,000
70,000
80,000
90,000
BS Level 3 - Rs 2500/c
Level 4 - Rs 5000/c
1000/c for NPTEL
2 Level 4 mandatory DS = 8c
2 Level 4 mandatory DP = 8c
4c NPTEL + 8c Level 3
4c NPTEL + 4c Level 3 + 4c Level 4
4c NPTEL + 8c Level 4
12c Level 3
12c Level 4
40000
40000
4000+20000

4000+30000
4000+40000
30000
60000
104000
114000
124000
110000
140000
Fee waivers depend on the category of learner and family income
Family Income
> 5 LPA
Family Income > 1
LPA and <= 5 LPA
Family
Income <= 1
LPA
Fees Docs Required Fees
Docs
Required Fees Docs Required
General Full Fee NIL 50% waiver
EWS +
Family
Income 75% waiver
EWS + Family
Income
OBC Full Fee NIL 50% waiver
OBC-NCL
+ Family
Income 75% waiver
OBC-NCL +
Family Income

SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 50% waiver SC / ST 75% waiver
SC / ST + Family
Income
PwD 50% waiver PwD 50% waiver PwD 75% waiver
PwD + EWS /
OBC-NCL +
Family Income
SC / ST +
PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD 75% waiver
SC / ST +
PwD 75% waiver SC / ST + PwD
4.1 For students who are outside India:
Facilitation fee for exams is in addition to the above for candidates writing exams overseas as fixed up with the local exam partner there. These are subject to periodic changes
depending on the local exam partner identified.
Facilitation Fee
Quiz1 [irrespective of num of courses] = Rs.2000/Quiz2 [irrespective of num of courses] = Rs.2000/End term [per session] = Rs.2000/- [one course it is Rs.2000/- & more than one course it is
Rs. 4000/-]
E.,g If you opt for 4 courses
Quiz1 = 2000, Quiz2 = 2000, EndTerm = 4000
Totally 8000 to be paid as a facilitation fee
*Facilitation fee may vary based on country. Eg: Kuwait & Bahrain it is Rs. 3000/5. Admission to the programme
5.1 Regular Entry into Foundation level
To enter the Foundation level, applicants have to pass the Qualifier exam.
The Foundation courses allow for interested applicants with a variety of educational
backgrounds to be trained in the basics (Math, Statistics, Computational Thinking, Python
programming and English) required to take up the Diploma level of Programming & Data
Science courses.
Entry: Via the Qualifier exam into the Foundation level
Exit 1. Foundation course certificate
Exit 2. Diploma in Programming/Data Science or both
Exit 3. BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science from IIT Madras
Exit 4: BS in Data Science and Applications from IIT Madras
5.1.1 Eligibility to Apply for the Qualifier Exam

Minimum eligibility: Should have studied Mathematics and English in Class 10.
1. Anyone who has passed Class 12 or equivalent can apply irrespective of age or
academic background. Those who qualify can join the program immediately. View list
of accepted class 12 equivalents.
2. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can apply
irrespective of their group/stream/board. Those who qualify can join the program after
passing Class 12.
No additional eligibility other than the ones mentioned above is required to apply for the
qualifier process or join the foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam.
The week 1 content is available to all candidates to sample on the website
(https://study.iitm.ac.in/ds/academics.html#AC15) and view when they fill the Qualifier exam
form. The learner has to fill the qualifier form available on the website study.iitm.ac.in/ds
The learner has to pay the fees for the Qualifier exam - currently set as Rs 3000/-for Gen
category with suitable waivers for candidates from the SC/ST and PwD with 40% disability
backgrounds. Currently there is no waiver for any other group of learners.
The fee will not be refunded once paid.
5.1.2 Preparation for the Qualifier exam
All regular entry applicants must go through the 4 week Qualifier Process to earn admission to
the Foundation Level.
On the start date of the qualifier process week 1, access to the content for the four
Foundation level courses - English 1, Maths-1, Statistics-1 and Computational Thinking will be
provided.
The content that includes videos, tutorials, practice/graded assignments and text transcripts is
released week wise.
The content will be made live with an announcement on the portal, and an alert through email.
Every week the graded assignment must be submitted in each course.
5.1.3 Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam
At the end of the 4 weeks, a qualifier exam will be conducted for eligible candidates based on
the content covered in the 4 weeks of study.
Each assignment will be graded out of 100
Any assignment that is not attempted will be marked as 0.
There is a change in the modality of finalizing the students who become eligible to write the
qualifier exam.
● If the average of the first 2 weeks’ assignment scores is >= 40/100 (or as per the cutoff
for each category of students) in each of the 4 subjects, the students will be eligible to
write the qualifier exam in the first attempt within the term.
● For those who do not qualify after the week 2 assignments, the average of the best 2 out
of the first 3 weeks’ assignment scores will be considered. If this score is >= 40/100 (or
as per the cutoff for each category of students) in each of the 4 subjects, the students
will become eligible to write the qualifier exam in the second attempt within the term.
● Reattempts within the term will be given suitably.
Only those who get the minimum required average assignment scores in all four courses (as
given below) will be allowed to appear for the Qualifier Exam.

Minimum Average Assignment Score
required in each course
General Learner 40%
SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability 30%
PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST 30%
OBC-NCL / EWS 35%
Note: Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various categories of learners is applicable
ONLY for the qualifier process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria
once registered into the program.
Hall tickets will be released for only those candidates who become eligible to take the
in-person proctored Qualifier Exam.
5.1.4 Criteria for passing the qualifier exam
In the qualifier exam comprising 4 subjects, the learner should obtain marks >= individual
subject cut-off as shown below. The total of all subject marks should be greater than the total
cut-off. The cutoff marks are clearly specified for the different categories of learners in the
table below.
Min. Req. Qualifier Exam
Score in each course
Min. Req. Average Qualifier
Exam Score
General Learner 40% 50%
SC / ST / PwD with 40%
disability 30% 40%
PwD with 40% disability &
SC / ST 30% 40%
OBC-NCL / EWS 35% 45%
The qualifier exam marks will be displayed within the login on the portal along with an email
and whatsapp alert sent to the candidates about this.
5.1.5 Validity of the qualifier score
The qualifier marks will be valid for the 3 terms that come subsequent to the qualifier exam
date for the learner to register to the Foundation level. This score will be invalid after this
period and the learner will have to go through the entire qualifier process (the 1 month of
weekly assignments) and retake the qualifier exam, if they wish to join the programme.
For students in std XII who take the qualifier exam, the validity is for 3 terms from when they
pass std XII.
5.1.6 Communication about qualifier exam results
Those who have qualified as per the above process will be intimated through email and

whatsapp and within their login on the portal - if they are eligible to register further. An
admission letter will also be generated and provided to each qualified candidate.
Once a candidate has qualified, they will not be permitted to apply again until their score is
valid, which is for the next 3 subsequent terms. After this they will be eligible to reapply again.
The fees paid to attempt the Qualifier exam will not be refunded in either of the two situations
- for those who missed writing the qualifier exam and for those who did not pass it.
5.1.7 Second attempt: If a candidate was absent or failed the first attempt
of qualifier exam
There are two attempts within any term currently. In every term, qualifier exams are conducted
at the end of 4 weeks and at the end of 8 weeks.
Eligibility to apply for Reattempting Qualifier exam within the same term:
● A learner who became eligible for the hall ticket in the qualifier process of a term but
was absent for the final exam
● failed in the first attempt
Such candidates do not have to repeat the assignments as they have already become eligible.
This re-attempt application form will open up immediately after the qualifier results are
announced. The fee for this is as follows:
General Category / OBC Applicant ₹1500 re-attempt fee
SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40%
disability ) Applicant
₹750 re-attempt fee
SC / ST Category Applicant who is
ALSO PwD (>= 40% disability )
₹375 re-attempt fee
5.1.8 Candidates who did not become eligible for Qualifier exam
There are no limits on the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier process.
The candidate can attempt again the subsequent terms.
They have to pay the full fees as per the fee norms applicable for their category. (and
additional exam facilitation fee in case of candidates outside India)
This will be considered like a fresh application and they have to redo the 4 weeks of course
work and weekly graded assignments and become eligible to get the hall ticket for the qualifier
exam
5.1.9 Options to register to courses once qualified
● Candidates who qualify in the first attempt within a term
○ have the option to register to courses and continue with completing them in the
same term. In this case, qualifier score is treated as Quiz1 score to calculate
the Final score.
○ Have the option to register to courses in the next 2 terms till when the qualifier

score is valid.
● Candidates who qualify in the second attempt within a term can ONLY register from
the subsequent term till the qualifier score is valid.
In a learner’s first term immediately following the qualifier exam, the qualifier exam scores and
assignment scores in the subjects registered will be considered as Quiz 1 score and first 4
assignment scores of the corresponding subjects.
5.2 JEE-based Entry into Foundation Level
There is a direct entry into the Foundation level of the program for students who have qualified
for the JEE Advanced Exams. Currently the validity of this is for the 3 terms following the
release of the JEE Advanced Eligibility list.
Candidates who qualified to appear for JEE Advanced 2022 can directly join our program in
the Sep 2023/Jan 2024 Term and Candidates who qualified to appear for JEE Advanced 2023
can directly join our program in the Sep 2023/Jan 2024/May 2024/Sep 2024/Jan 2025 Terms
The process will be as follows:
Apply to the Qualifier process, saying Yes to the question on eligibility to JEE Advanced level.
Upload a valid proof for the same.
● If the proof is found to be valid:
○ The candidate will be declared eligible to join the Foundational level courses.
○ They will be issued the admission letter.
○ Such candidates can directly register to courses in the foundation level with
CCC as 4.
● If the proof document submitted is found to be not valid, the student will be moved into
the category of non-JEE and will be treated as a regular entry candidate to the
foundation level and have to go through the qualifier process.
6. Credit Clearing Capability
The value S used to determine the maximum number of courses that the learner is permitted
to register in a term is calculated as shown below.
● Term 1: decided by qualifier marks
● Term 2: decided by average of marks of all courses taken in Term 1 in which the
learner has passed
● Term n (n>2): M = average marks of courses passed in the previous two terms Term
n-1 and Term n-2 (This will be calculated using marks of subjects in which the
candidate has passed, not those which he/she has not passed or is not completed
yet); (n-1 and n-2 terms must be terms where the learner status is Active - defined in
section 11. Learner Life Cycle
Marks M (as defined above) Maximum number of courses that learner
is permitted to register in any term
0 <= M< 50 2
50 <= M< 70 3
M >= 70 4

The credit clearing capability CCC will be decided as follows:
● If a learner has passed at least one course in term n-1, then the CCC of term n will be
calculated based on the marks as given in the above table.
● If a learner has failed all courses the learner has appeared for in term n-1, CCC of next
term n will be 2.
● If a learner is absent for final exam of all courses, thus not completing their courses
and not getting grades, CCC of next term = CCC of the learner’s last term
CCC is kept as 4 by default for
● everyone who chooses to register to courses in the same term as the qualifier exam
● For all JEE candidates in the first term
● For everyone in the Diploma and Degree levels
7. Course registration - steps involved
Students who are continuing with the program will go through the following steps to sign up for
the courses:
● Within the registration window, students will pick the courses they want to take in the
coming term, with limiting criteria on total courses registered being their CCC i.e learners
can register to maximum number of courses <= their CCC.
● Students pick 2 cities among the choices provided for their quizzes and exams for that
term.
○ They have the freedom to choose a different set of cities than the ones they opted for
in the previous terms.
○ Also they can choose a different set of cities for every quiz/final exam while registering
for the courses so that accordingly booking may be done with the Exam vendor for
slots in these cities.
● Students can register to courses for which the prerequisite is completed. The
pre-requisites are mentioned in 13.9 Prerequisite course requirements
○ e.g. in order to sign up for Math-2, the learner must have cleared Math-1
● Students can take any course within a particular level of study but are not allowed to sign
up for courses across levels.
○ Students who successfully complete all courses in the Foundation level will be eligible
for admission to the Diploma level program.
○ Learners who successfully complete all courses in the Foundation and diploma
programme will be eligible for admission to the degree level, if they satisfy the
prescribed/regulatory criteria.
○ Students who complete 114 credits as per the norms will be eligible for the BSc degree
and can continue onto the BS level.
● Learners pay only for the number of credits they are signing up for (online payment only).
8. Direct Entry into Diploma programme
For those who have the foundations to enter the Diploma programme directly and those who
wish to do just the Diploma and exit with it, this is a pathway. It is primarily aimed at working
professionals or learners who already possess the fundamentals taught in Year 1 of this
programme to enter the Diploma level directly.
Entry - Into Diploma level

Exit - One or both Diplomas from IIT Madras
8.1 Eligibility to Apply
Students who have completed 2 years in any UG degree programme are permitted to apply to
the diploma level through direct entry. Their second year marksheet or higher must be
submitted as proof to qualify under this category.
8.2 Qualifying Process
1. A separate Direct Admission to Diploma (DAD) qualifier exam will be conducted for the
Diploma in programming (DP) and Diploma in Data Science (DS).
2. These are conducted on the same date as the end term examinations of the IITM BS
DS program. Hence these are conducted three times a year.
3. Any candidate crossing the cut off marks defined below will be eligible to enter the
Diploma Programme corresponding to the qualifier attempted and register to the
courses.
4. There will be no limit on the number of attempts by any candidate for direct entry,
though the recommendation would be that if they do not pass the qualifier, they
attempt through the foundation level.
5. The qualifier for DAD-DP will be a 3 hr exam, subjects being English, Aptitude and 6
weeks of Maths 1. Students have to study Computational Thinking, Introduction to
Python and then move on to the Programming Diploma subjects.
6. The qualifier exam for the DAD-DS will be a 4 hr exam, with subjects being English,
Maths 1, Statistics 1 and Python programming. Students have to start with Maths 2
and Statistics 2 and then continue with subjects in the Data Science diploma.
Students who have completed the Diploma in Data Science by Direct admission are directly
eligible to also pursue the Diploma in Programming, if they wish to, without attempting the
qualifier exam for this.
But students who complete the Diploma in Programming and wish to pursue the Diploma in
Data Science have to appear for the qualifier for DS as they would not have studied Statistics
1 and Maths 1 as part of course work.
Fees for the DAD
qualifier exam
Minimum
required
Qualifier Exam
Score in each
subject
Cut off marks required
in DAD Qualifier exam
GEN / OBC-CL Rs 6000/- 40% 50/100
SC/ST/PwD Rs 3000/- 30% 40/100

SC/ST AND PwD Rs 1500/- 30% 40/100
OBC-NCL, EWS Rs 6000/- 35% 45/100
Table 1: Department Core/Elective Courses
Table 2: SWAYAM NPTEL Courses Applicable for Department/Free
Electives
The NPTEL courses given in the below can be credited at the BSc level. Any course can be
credited only once in this programme. Also, the same NPTEL course cannot be credited twice within your college for another academic programme and this BSc programme. It should be
credited
only in either of the above.
SWAYAM NPTEL Approved Dep/Free Elective course list:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSJXV0JECyoQvgWvBlVxO13G0KRm5a1q
NCRBa7rAw8GDY4e0cfm1KiVCwIgs_ed80ObtzQ1rfx_JWIR/pubhtml?gid=399341609&single=t
rue
Note that the list of courses is subject to periodic revision.
Table 3: SWAYAM NPTEL courses Applicable under HS/MG
category for crediting in the BS level
Upto a maximum of 4 credits can be credited under the HM category in the BS degree level,
which can be done from NPTEL or courses within the program.
(Refer Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses)
SWAYAM NPTEL Approved HS/MG course list:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSJXV0JECyoQvgWvBlVxO13G0KRm5a
1qNCRBa7rAw8GDY4e0cfm1KiVCwIgs_ed80ObtzQ1rfx_JWIR/pubhtml?gid=1418834182&si
ngle=true
Note that the list of courses is subject to periodic revision. From the NPTEL course URL, please
select the
SWAYAM Certification courses. Only these are eligible for Credit Transfer
9. Credit Transfer
Credit Transfer for NPTEL Courses
The following process is to be followed for credit transfer from NPTEL:
a. An NPTEL course of duration 4/8/12 weeks carries credit equivalence of 1/2/3 credits in
the BS degree program.
b. The learner must register for the NPTEL exam using the @ds.study.iitm.ac.in Email ID.
c. The learner has to register for NPTEL exams, pay the exam fee, and complete the NPTEL
course.
d. An NPTEL course can be transferred for credit only once and only to one program. The
learner has to give an undertaking that they are submitting this course for credit transfer
only to the IITM BS Degree program.

e. The NPTEL courses will be added in PASS/FAIL mode and counted towards the credits
with no letter grade and will not be included in the CGPA calculation.
f. The fee for credit transfer from NPTEL courses is fixed as Rs 1000/- per credit. Hence, Rs
1000/-, Rs 2000/-, Rs 3000/- should be remitted as fees if a learner opts for credit transfer
from NPTEL courses of duration 4/8/12 weeks. This fee is to be paid to the BS degree
program, and is separate from the fee to be paid to NPTEL to complete the course.
g. The learner can complete NPTEL courses any time after joining the Foundation Level
(using the official IITM email) and apply for the course credit transfer in the BSc/BS levels.
h. Refer the below table to know which term NPTEL courses can be transferred to which
term in BS
NPTEL courses completed in below term Credit Transfer to BS Program in Term
January September
July January
Credit Transfer from courses that are conducted on IITM
campus (**This will be in effect from January 2024**)
● A maximum of 24 credits can be earned from IITM campus courses.
● Students who have completed the foundation and the 2 diplomas and have cgpa of
>=8 will be eligible to earn credits from campus courses.
● The maximum number of credits that can be taken at the BSc level will be 8. These
credits are to be obtained from the Engineering, Science or Management departments.
● Students who have completed 114 credits in the IITM BS program and completed the
BSc level with a cgpa of >=8 will be permitted to credit 24-x credits at the BS level
where x is the number of credits they have earned in the BSc level from IITM campus
courses. A maximum of 8 credits can be transferred from the HS category in the BS
level, including the HS category credits earned through NPTEL.
● IITM BS students can apply to courses they are interested in and their acceptance will
be based on the availability of seats for the course.
● The fees for transferring the credits from each on-campus course will be Rs 2500/- per
credit of IITM BS program. The fee to be paid to the institute will be apart from this and
will be as per the institute norms.
● Students will have to attend the class in person unless a hybrid mode of accessing the
classes is available. The on-campus courses credited by the BS students will be listed
in the transcript along with the corresponding grades. The credits transferred from the
on-campus courses into the BS program will be counted towards the CGPA of the
student.
10. Learner Life Cycle
Once a learner clears the qualifier, he/she will be eligible to register for the Foundation level.
Using their personal email id, they register to as many courses as permitted by CCC and
make the payment. After approval of the uploaded documents, the learner is given a
roll_number@ds.study.iitm.ac.in email id.
Henceforth all interactions on the portal right from login to accessing the learner dashboard

and courses will be via this email id.
There will be 5 statuses for any learner in the programme : On the rolls/Active, On Academic
Probation, Struck off the rolls, Alumnus, Quit the programme
● On the rolls/Active - When a learner is registered in any term for one or more courses
after paying the course fees, the status will be “On the rolls” or Active.
● On academic probation/Not registering to any course in a term:
After joining the programme, a learner may skip up to 2 terms consecutively without
taking any courses. In the two terms where the learner does not register for any
course, the learner status will be marked as “On Academic Probation”. The learner
email ID will still be kept alive while the learner is on academic probation.
○ The learner can actively inform us about not registering to courses by paying the
“Registration keep alive fee (RKA)” of Rs 1000/- per term. In case of registering to
courses in the next term, the learners have to only pay the course fees.
○ The learner may not pay the RKA and have it as pending to be paid. Pending RKA
will include 10% extra over regular RKA when re-registering back.
■ To register to courses in the next term if not paid the RKA: The learner will
have to pay the pending dues = (which will be Rs 1100/- or Rs 2200/- (Rs
1000 RKA +10% as penalty for each term where no courses are
registered). The learner has to select the courses and pay the course fees.
Once they do this, the learner status is changed to "On the rolls".
● Struck off the rolls: If a learner with status “On Academic Probation” for 2 consecutive
terms does not register for courses in the next term too, the learner’s status is changed to
"Struck off the rolls". The official email id is suspended.
● Once struck off the rolls, to reactivate the registration, they will have to apply
through a separate process as defined:
● If the RKA for the previous 3 terms has already been paid, they have to request for
reactivating the email id on payment of Re-admission fee of Rs 2500/-. Once done,
they can register for the courses in the upcoming term.
● If the RKA for the previous 3 terms has not been paid, the learner has to apply to
activate his/her account by paying the pending dues which will be Rs 5800/- = Rs
2500 (Readmission fee) + Rs 3300/- (Rs 1000 RKA x 3terms+Rs 300 (10% as
penalty)). On receipt of the payment, the official email id is activated again and they
are permitted to register using this id. Once they do this, the status is changed to
"On the rolls".
● Any learner who is struck off the rolls 2 times, is removed from the programme.
● Quitting the programme: There will also be an option inside the candidate dashboard
which says "I quit the programme". Once the learner applies for this midway through a
level, we suspend the official email account and activate the personal email account to
access the dashboard. No reactivation for continuing the program is possible.
● Alumnus: Learners who complete the BSc level / BS level and quit the program, at the
end of it, we again suspend the official email id and activate the personal email
account to access the dashboard. Their status will be changed to “Alumnus”.
Students completing the foundation or diploma level and quitting the programme will have

status as “FL certified” and “DS certified”/”DP certified”/”Both diplomas certified” but will not be
awarded the Alumnus status.
Timeline for certificate:
*We need to get the senate approval before generating the original certificate. Senate
meetings will be conducted three or four times in a year. Please refer the below timeline for
certificate issue date
Term
Cut off date for quit
gform response
Cert Delivery date Type of Cert
May 2023
Friday, November 17,
2023
Friday, December 22,
2023
Original
Sep 2023 Friday, December 1, 2023
Friday, December 15,
2023*
Provisional
Sep 2023 Friday, January 12, 2024 Friday, March 1, 2024
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
Jan 2024 Friday, March 15, 2024 Tuesday, April 2, 2024* Provisional
Jan 2024 Monday, May 20, 2024 Wednesday, July 3, 2024
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
May 2024 Sunday, July 28, 2024 Sunday, August 11, 2024* Provisional
May 2024

Sunday, September 22,
2024
Tuesday, November 5,
2024
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
Sep 2024
Sunday, November 17,
2024
Monday, December 2,
2024*
Provisional
Sep 2024
Sunday, January 12,
2025
Thursday, February 27,
2025
Provisional (P) or Original
(O)
*Applicable only for project only registered students.
2024 calendar link: https://study.iitm.ac.in/ds/academic_calendar.html
Note: Updated photo used for hall ticket will be printed in provisional certificate.
11. Design of certificates for the 4 levels of the program
The design has been finalised for the 4 levels of certificates, as shown on the website.
Design for provisional certificates:
11.1 Mark transcripts
There will be 2 types of documents that will be made available automatically.
1. Term wise Progress card

This document will list all the courses taken by the learner term wise.
The values for every course will be course code, course name, level, grade obtained.
Note that the transcript will show all attempts and grades obtained in each of the
attempts.
2. Grade Card
This will have the courses at each level listed only once. The best score obtained
among all attempts for each course is what will be shown here.
GPA will be calculated for the courses in a particular term of the programme.
GPA=Σi(GPi*Ci)/ΣCi
Where GP = grade point of a course and Ci is the number of credits assigned to that
course and ΣCi is the total number of credits of all courses in the term, including those with
U or W grades.
The CGPA will also be computed for all unique courses completed until this point in time
with the best grade being considered in case a course is attempted multiple times.
11.2 Procedure to Apply for Official Transcript & Bonafide
Certificate
Students who are interested in applying for a transcript/bonafide certificate have to follow
these steps. Note that these certificates will be issued every Thursday. Students have to plan
suitably and contact us.
Please refer the link to know the criteria for official documents given to students:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQnn2cFan5BqTTAByCoqtue-0XSmFXQPT9
1bADDL_i33tHMh8C0ZJepvFBwze4E5zJbGiBMdQa59VeT/pub
12. Academic aspects
12.1 Academic calendar
1. There will be 3 terms every year - Jan-Apr, May-Aug and Sep-Dec.
2. All the foundation, diploma level courses, the mandatory courses of the BSc level will
be offered in every term.
* While 36 months (3 years/9 terms) is time permitted for completion of any level, 96 months
(8 years/24 terms) is the time permitted for the entire programme.
For Project:
Category Payment Category Waiver Grade
New Registration 2500 Yes Actual grade
Fee for Level 1 or 2 reattempt 1000 No Actual grade
If the project is not completed in the registered term - the fee is
retained for the subsequent term, grade will be marked as I.
. If the project is not completed in the second term also, then the
registration becomes invalid, grade will be marked as U and the
student has to pay the full fees again.

2500 Yes I or U
If the student fails in the project, grade awarded will be U and
Student has to redo the project by registering to the project by
paying the full fees.
2500 Yes U
If the submission is found to be Plagiarized,
a. Student maybe subjected to disciplinary action
b. Student has to redo the project by registering to the
project by paying the full fees.
2500 Yes U
12.2 Course structure suitable for online delivery
All courses of 4 credits will be of duration 12 weeks.
The recorded content which is released every week will be for a total of about 2-4 hours, split
into multiple lectures which includes the theory and tutorial videos. All videos are copyrighted
to IIT Madras but will be available on YouTube as a public playlist for anyone to access and
view.
Self test assessments for every video lecture, a practice assignment for the week with
solutions will also be released apart from text transcripts and any related notes.
The weekly graded assignment will also be released along with the above content.
12.3 Evaluation and grading of courses in every term
Each course has 3 types of assessments - online weekly assignments, monthly in-person
proctored quizzes and an in-person end term exam.
1. Online assignments:
- A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted online
within the due date specified.
- The average score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments given during the
course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible to write the final exam and get the hall
ticket for the same.
- This will also contribute to the Final score and course grade.(Score in any unattempted
assignment will be counted as 0).
- May change from course to course - check the grading document for actual details
2. 2 proctored Quizzes - to be attempted in person in the city chosen
Two quizzes will be conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the content of
Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively.
- Will be a single session exam with 4 hrs to attempt 4 subjects, 3 hrs to attempt 3
subjects and 2 hrs to attempt 2 or 1 subject.
- The Qualifier score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses registered in
the Foundation level only in the subsequent term of the qualifier exam, unless the

candidate attempts Quiz 1 again in which case the better of the 2 scores will be
used for calculations.
- The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will be
provided.
- At least one of the 2 quizzes has to be mandatorily attended by the candidate else
he/she will not be eligible to write the final exam. (check grading document for
changes)
3. Final end term exam at the end of the course
- At the end of a term, there will be an end term exam of 1.5 hours duration for each
course. (This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and exams for 4
courses completed in 2 sessions of 3 hrs each throughout the program.)
- Eligibility to write the End sem exam: Pls check the grading document for details.
- The final exam score accounts for 50% of the Total Course Score T - called End
Semester Score (E)
12.4 Pass criteria for each course
Total Course Score (T) will be the sum of all assessment components in every course as
defined in the Grading document of that term.
A candidate is deemed to have passed a course IF Total Course Score (T) >= 40/100
This criteria is the same for all learners in the course.
An absolute grading system, as described in the following table, will be followed:
Condition satisfied by
‘T’ - Total Course Score (Out Of 100)
Status Letter Grade Grade point
(T ≥ 90) Pass S 10
(90 > T ≥ 80) Pass A 9
(80 > T ≥ 70) Pass B 8
(70 > T ≥ 60) Pass C 7
(60 > T ≥ 50) Pass D 6
(50 > T >= 40) Pass E 4
(T < 40) Fail U 0
Weekly average assignment score
<40/100
or 0 quizzes attended - (Not eligible to
write the final exam)
Fail WA/WQ 0
Complete ET alone in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.

GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be carried
over OR Repeat the entire course
Incomplete
(Absent in ET
alone)
IComplete ET and OPE in next term, Both
oppes will be scheduled.
GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR Repeat the entire course
Incomplete
(Absent in both
ET & OPPE)
I_BOTH Complete OPE alone in next term, Both
oppes will be scheduled. GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over OR Repeat the
entire course
Incomplete
(Absent/fail in
OPPE)
I_OP 12.5 Repeating a course
1. For improvement
A learner can repeat a course for improvement in grades any number of times. The fee
for repeating the course for improvement will be twice the regular course fee and the
learner will have to submit all the weekly assignments, appear for the quizzes and final
exams. The highest score amongst all attempts for a course will be used for calculating
the CGPA.
2. If learner was not eligible to attempt the end term exam (grade=WA/WQ) or if the
learner did not pass the course (Grade = U)
If average assignment score < 40/100 or no quiz attended or T<40/100, the learner
has to repeat the entire course. This includes submission of assignments and redoing
all the subsequent quizzes and the end term exam. Fees for repeating the course is
the same as the course fees.

3. If the learner was absent for the final exam alone (grade = I): The learner has 2
options:
a. Reappear for the final term exam - Makeup exam: They can attend only the
end term exam whenever it is conducted in the subsequent term.
● The fee to repeat an end term exam will be Rs.1000 for each course of the
foundational level and Rs. 2000 for each course of the diploma / degree
levels.
● If the learner reattempts the course in the immediate next term, then the
average Quiz Score Q will be carried over and the learner does not have to
resubmit the quizzes or the assignments.
● If the learner wishes to skip the immediate next term and attempt the
course in subsequent terms, then the entire course will have to be repeated
including the weekly assignments and quizzes.
● A learner can reappear for the makeup exam only once. If the learner
misses the makeup exam, then the learner has to repeat the entire course
in the term thereafter, by paying the full course fees and repeating all
assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end term exam.
b. Repeat the entire course: They can choose to repeat the entire course.
● The fee to repeat the course will be the same as the regular course fees.
● The learner must complete all assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end
term exam.
● Registering to this course will be counted as one of the courses permitted
as per the CCC of the learner.
Note: Learners repeating a course for any reason must do so within the time and term limits:
● Each level must be completed within 36 months (3 years / 9 terms).
● The entire programme must be completed within 96 months (8 years / 24 terms).
12.5.1 Registering for Courses: Term 2 Onwards
● Maximum number of final exams (full course+makeup exams) <= 4
● Maximum number of new + repeat full course (if failed/absent if reqd/improvement) <=
CCC
● Registering for new courses is subject to fulfilment of all rules and prerequisites.
● If a student passes all/some courses then CCC is calculated on the average of passed
courses.
● If a student fails all courses, then CCC is set to 2.
● If a student is absent for all courses then CCC of the previous term is carried forward.
● Make up exam will be permitted as an option only once in the subsequent term.
12.5.2 Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade
Applicable for courses with WA, WQ, U or I grade.
You can choose to repeat courses in a single term or across multiple terms. You can also
register for new courses in the term. The total number of courses must be within the CCC
limit. Learners with an Incomplete (I) grade in a course can take a Make Up Exam instead of

repeating the course.
12.5.3 Repeating a Course for Improvement
Applicable for courses with S, A, B, C, D or E grade.
You can choose to repeat courses to improve the grade in the course. The highest grade will
be recorded in the transcript. The total number of courses must be within the CCC limit.
Course fee Repeat for Improvement courses will be double the normal fee. Improvement
courses can be registered at any level. Eg: Foundation course improvement can be registered
at diploma level.
Note: It is recommended that learners try and progress with new courses instead of repeating
courses for improvement, unless a learner deems it absolutely necessary or needs to improve
their learning of a course. All course material of completed courses are available to the learner
throughout the course.
Please write to support to get an improvement gform. Students have to mandatorily
apply for any new course or RKA in course registration form. We will not accept gform
entry alone.
12.5.4 Make Up Exams
Applicable for courses with I grade.
You can choose to take a Makeup Exam for a course with Incomplete (I) grade. Learners will
only be required to reappear for the Final Exam for that course. The Makeup Exam does not
count towards CCC, but a student can appear for a maximum of FOUR final exams in a term.
If you have already registered for 4 courses, you do not have any more final exam slots
available.
Note: The grading pattern for make-up exams will be as follows: the pattern used will be as
per the formula used in the term the course work was done and not as per the term the
makeup exam was taken.
Quick Reckoner Table
COURSE PASS
STATUS
New Course
Allowed?
Repeat
Course?
Take Make Up
Exam?
Passed all Yes
Not recommended
but available

Failed any/all Yes Yes
Absent for all
final exams
Yes Yes
Passed + Absent Yes Yes
Failed + Absent Yes Yes Yes
Repeating OPPE:
OPE1/OPE2 ET T Grade
Condition for
OPPE/course reg
Foundation Diploma
Absent Absent - U Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Course
Fee
Absent Present
>=35 I
Complete OPE alone in
next term, GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course
1000 2000
<35 U Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Course
Fee
Present
score< x/100
Present
>=40 I

Complete OPE alone in
next term, GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course
1000 2000
<40 U Repeat the entire course Course Fee
Course
Fee
Absent - I
Repeat OPPE and ET OR
Repeat Entire course
2000 4000
Present
score> x/100
Present
>=40
Actual
grade
PASS (depending on
course criteria)
Course Fee
Course
Fee
<40 U Repeat entire course Course Fee
Course
Fee
Absent - I
Repeat ET alone OR
Repeat Entire course
1000 2000

● OPPE will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating ET alone.
● ET will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating OPPE alone.
● Students who registered for repeating OPPE & ET will have to appear for OPPE1,
OPPE2 & ET.
Registered Category OPPE
ET alone No OPPE will be conducted
OPPE alone Both OPPE will be conducted
ET + OPPE Both OPPE will be conducted
12.6 Dropping a course (This is not applicable for the students who are
continuing after qualifier in the same term)
Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed.
Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start date and not
beyond. Rs 2000 will be deducted if a Foundation level course is dropped and Rs
4000 will be deducted if a Diploma/Degree level course is dropped.
a. If the learner decides to drop out of the programme completely using the “I quit
the programme” option, the course fee paid minus the deduction will be
refunded to the learner and the learner will be removed from the programme,
cancelling his official email id access. The status will also be changed to “Quit
the programme”.
b. If the learner drops one/a few of the courses registered to in a term, the refund
will be made as given in the table below but the email id will be kept active so
that he/she can continue with other ongoing courses and the programme.
Status will be “Active”.
c. If the learner opts to drop all courses registered in a term, the refund will be
done as per the table given below and the email id will be kept active so that
the learner can come in and register in the next term. But this will be counted
as a term with 0 courses. Status will be changed to “Academic probation”.
d. The fee receipt will be generated post these 4 weeks after term start when drop
is permitted so that all the courses and fees are tallied and confirmed.
e. Learners writing exams outside India would have paid Exam facilitation Fee
while registering for the courses. For such learners:
i. If they drop from all courses in a term, 100% of the facilitation fee for
Quiz 1 will be retained while 50% of the facilitation fee for quizzes 2 and
final exam will be refunded.
Level
Paid Retained by IITM
as Admin charges
Refund

Foundation 4000 2000 2000
2000 2000 0
1000 2000 0
Diploma/Degree 10000 4000 6000
5000 4000 1000
2500 4000 0
Project Course 2500 500 2000
Please note, The amount to be refunded will be added to your student wallet and NOT refunded
to the
bank account. This amount can be used when you register for courses in the next term and
deducted
from the fees to be paid then.
13. Learning paths available
Here are some suggested learning paths...
1. Foundation course certificate
2. Diploma in Programming
3. Diploma in Data Science
4. Diploma in Programming and Data Science
5. BSc degree in Programming and Data Science
Term
Foundatio
n
Plan for One
Diploma
Plan for Both
the Diplomas
BSc Degree BS Degree
Shortest
Path for BSc
Degree
Year 1
Term 1 3 1 1 2 2 4
Term 2 2 2 2 3 3 4
Term 3 3 2 2 3 3 4
Year 2
Term 1 2 2 3 3 4
Term 2 1 2 2 2 4

Term 3 2 2 2 2 4
Year 3
Term 1 1 1 3 3 4
Term 2 1 2 3 3 3
Term 3 2 1 2 2
Year 4 Term 1 2 3 3
Term 2 2 2 2
Term 3 1 3 3
Total Courses
8 14 20 31 31
13.1 Prerequisite course requirements
Foundation courses
Level Course Pre-req Coreq
Foundation Maths 1 - Statistics 1 - English 1 - CT - Maths 2 Maths 1
Statistics 2 Statistics 1 Maths2
English 2 English 1
Intro to python CT
A co-requisite for Statistics-2 is Maths-2. So either Maths-2 has to be done before statistics-2
or both can be taken together. Statistics-2 cannot be done without having done Maths-2.
All the 8 Foundation courses should be completed before the candidate can register to any
Year 2 Diploma level course.
Diploma level courses
Level Course Pre-req Coreq
Diploma in DS MLF - BDM - MLT MLF
MLP MLT, MLF
BA BDM
TDS MLF
Diploma in Prog DBMS - PDSA - App dev 1 - DBMS
Java - -

App dev 2 App dev 1
SC - Without completing all the 8 Foundation courses and the 12 Diploma level courses + 4
project courses, one cannot proceed to register for Year 3 Degree level courses.
Degree Level Courses:
Please note that L5_Degree courses are complex compared to Degree and L4_Degree
courses. Course
fee and credits are same as L4_Degree courses.
14. Changes in project grading (wef now) and
Eligibility to enter the BSc Level (wef May 2024)
Here are two changes being effected with respect to project grading and eligibility to
enter the degree level.
1. Project grading:
So far - students had to complete all feature requirements given for a project, pass the
L1 viva and move onto the L2 viva and pass that too to get a pass grade.
Looking into the data we have, we understand that all students may not be equally
proficient in the areas of programming, machine learning and business and excel in all
4 projects.
Hence the grading is being changed as follows:
MAD1, MAD2, MLP projects: WEF current term
1. For MAD1 and MAD2 projects, when the submitted Application passes the check for
Appdev, L1 viva will be scheduled.
For MLP project, if the cutoff is crossed in the Kaggle contest and the student declares
that all the models have been completed, the L1 viva is scheduled.
2. There are 2 cutoff marks that will be decided for the L1 level for each term:
a. Cutoff1: X, Cutoff2: Y;
b. X<Y, X>0
3. The L1 viva will be conducted and scoring will be done based on the rubrics defined for
it. Based on the marks scored in L1 viva (L1_S), the following are the possibilities:
a. If (L1_S < X): Student has to resubmit the project. A few days are given for
them to resubmit in the same term. If the second time also, L1_S<X, they will
have to redo the project in the next term.
b. If (X <= L1_S < Y), then students are asked some additional questions for
assessing their knowledge and awarded D or E grade. Such students do not go
in for L2 viva at all. They will have a pass grade.
c. If (L1_S >= Y), L2 viva is scheduled for them.
i. If they pass the viva cutoff for L2, they get a grade including L1 and L2
scores.
ii. If they do not pass the L2 viva cutoff, they get one more chance at L2

viva.
iii. If they do not pass in the second attempt at L2 viva, they get an
appropriate grade (C or D or E) based on their L1 performance alone.
BDM project evaluation
So far: The process has been identifying the business, collecting data, analysing and sharing
their insights.
Going forward from Jan 2024:
Students will be allowed to web scrape data and analyse it, sharing the source from where the
data was taken. The BDM team will outline the steps involved.The maximum grade that the
student can earn in this case will be D.
Eligibility for entering degree level of the program: WEF May 2024
● For a student to progress to the degree level (BSc) of the Data Science and
Applications program:
● they must secure a CGPA of 6.0 or higher at the end of two diplomas (includes
the courses in the foundation level and the diploma level and the projects)
● AND a CGPA of 7.0 or higher in all the projects completed at the diploma level.
● These CGPA requirements are not applicable to students who exit the program with
the diploma(s).
● Such students who exit the program with the diploma(s) without meeting either CGPA
criteria will not be eligible for any certificates of academic achievements or prizes.
● Students can repeat the theory courses any number of times within the stipulated
period for diploma level to improve the overall CGPA.
● Students who have overall CGPA of 6.0 or above and CGPA<7.0 in projects, which
prevents them from entering the degree level, will be given one additional opportunity
to improve their project grades to earn the eligibility to progress to the degree level.
● Students who cannot improve their CGPA above the required cut-offs must exit the
program with the diploma(s).
● This rule shall be applicable to all students entering the degree level (BSc) from the
May 2024 term.
For those students who completed diplomas with less than 4 standalone projects (in Sep
2021/Jan 2022 terms projects were included in theory courses), whatever projects were done
standalone will be counted for the average CGPA of 7.0. For example, if 2 projects were done
as part of the theory and 2 projects standalone, then only the grades in the two standalone
projects will be used to compute the project CGPA. The projects done as part of the theory
courses will not be counted.
For those who do 4 standalone projects, eligibility to enter degree level is illustrated below with
some examples:
P1 P2 P3 P4 Total points Eligible to enter the degree level?
E E S S 28 Yes
E E S A 27 No
D E S S/A/B 30/29/28 Yes

D D S/A/B S/A/B 28-32 Yes
D D C C 26 No
15. New Rules for Foundation & Diploma Level Completion
15.1 Foundation level checkpoints:
These conditions shall be applicable to the students admitted to the foundation level
from May 2024. These are not applicable for students who have entered in Jan 2024
term or before that.
Students will be removed from the program if they do not complete
a. at least 4 courses within 4 terms.
b. at least 6 courses within 6 terms.
c. the 8 foundation courses within 9 terms.
The student will be issued warnings about insufficient progress and about complying with
these conditions starting from term 3.
15.2 Change in CCC at the foundation level:
This is for ALL students in the foundation level.
Currently, the CCC is calculated based on the courses passed in the last 2 terms by the
students and enforced too, deciding the number of courses that students can take in a given
term in the Foundation Level.
In view of the conditions imposed above leading to exit from the program if not satisfied, it was
proposed that the CCC will only be a recommendation and not enforced. This will enable
students to make up for term breaks and meet the proposed course completion criteria.
15.3 Increasing the maximum number of terms for completing the diploma level
The Diploma level can now be completed in a maximum of 12 terms instead of 9 terms
as has been the case till now. This extension of 12 terms as the maximum limit to
complete the Diploma level shall be applied for all learners, starting from the first batch,
who started the Diploma Level in September 2021.
The maximum duration for the BSc and BS levels shall remain unchanged at 9 terms. The
total duration permissible for the BSc and BS degrees shall also remain at 6 and 8 years,
respectively.
15.4 Checkpoints in the Diploma level
These conditions below shall be applicable to the students admitted to the Diploma
level from May 2024. These are not applicable for students who have entered in Jan
2024 term or before that.
To ensure continuous progress and steer students towards completing courses on time, the
following intermediate checkpoints were also proposed. The student must complete
a. at least 3 courses and 1 project in the first 3 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be put on academic probation and given a warning.
b. at least 6 courses and 2 projects in the first 6 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be removed from the program.
c. at least 9 courses and 3 projects in the first 9 terms from starting the Diploma
level - if not, they will be removed from the program.
d. All 12 courses and 4 projects in 12 terms from starting the Diploma level - if not,

they will be removed from the program
The student will be issued sufficient alerts and warnings about these checkpoints.
16. Eligibility Criteria Prize
The Direct admission to the Diploma, where students exit with the Diploma, comprises 8
courses and 2 projects (35 credits).
Eligibility for Prizes:
1. Certificate of Merit
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits),
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: CGPA between 9.00 and 9.50 at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas or when
graduating with BS.
2. Certificate of Academic Distinction
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits) or
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: All students with CGPA greater than 9.50 at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas
or when graduating with BS.
3. Certificate of Academic Excellence
Awarded to students at 2 levels: completing Foundation+2 Diplomas (86 credits) or
completing the BS degree (142 credits)
Criteria: The students with the highest CGPA at the end of Foundation+2 Diplomas or
when graduating with BS will be identified and awarded. The actual number of students
will be decided by the Steering committee.
Such students will be awarded a medal along with the certificate.
The following will be the process followed for identifying the students eligible for the awards:
a. The list of students completing the foundation+2 diplomas or the BS degree in a
calendar year January-December will be consolidated and considered to finalize the
prizes.
b. Certificates will be awarded for the 3 categories with medals being given for the students
identified as having the highest CGPA alone.
c. The students completing Diplomas through the Direct admission process will be
considered as a separate category and will be eligible for prizes in the highest CGPA
category alone.
Prize Eligibility Criteria for Improvement Courses
We will consider the CGPA for prizes only till the term when the student completed 2
diploma’s. We will not consider the courses if the student registers as improvement after they
have completed both diplomas.
Eg: Student registered foundation/diploma course as improvement in May 2023 but completed
both diplomas in Jan 2023, then the CGPA secured in JAN 2023 will be considered for prize.
17. Apprenticeship in the BS level of IIT

Madras’ BS in Data Science and Applications
The program provides the students in the BS level of the program to pursue an apprenticeship
with companies and research projects and earn up to 12 credits in this level. Doing an
apprenticeship is optional.
Steps involved in the Apprenticeship program:
1. Approval for the company/research project where the student can work as an
apprentice
If the student applies and is accepted by any of the companies that are preapproved
by IITM for this purpose, the apprenticeship will be directly approved.
Else the student will have to submit the details of the company/organization and the
Apprenticeship committee will decide based on the details submitted.
2. Reporting Manager
Once the apprenticeship is approved, the student has to submit the details of the
Reporting Manager in the Organization to IITM.
3. Logging the weekly work report
Student has to file the work log to IITM BS office every week.
4. Review after first 4 weeks
After 4 weeks, based on the student’s performance, the reporting manager has to
confirm if they would like to continue with the student as an apprentice for the next 7
months. This confirmation letter should be submitted to the IITM BS Program’s Office.
5. Possible exit after 4 months
After the completion of 4 months, the student or the company can choose to
discontinue the apprenticeship. A letter from the company has to be submitted
outlining the work done by the student and whether it was satisfactory to obtain partial
credits.
6. After the completion of 8 months of internship
A letter from the Reporting Manager should be submitted to the IITM BS program on
the company’s letterhead stating the work done by the student and whether it was
satisfactory.
The following will be norms with respect to pursuing an apprenticeship:
1. Number of courses that can be taken along while pursuing the apprenticeship
Students can pursue a maximum of 2 courses each term during the duration of the
apprenticeship.
2. Duration of the apprenticeship that can be credited - 8 months, full time
3. Academic Credits
a. <4 months: 0 credits.
b. 4<duration<8 months: 4 credits
c. 8 months: 12 credits
4. Stipend: This is mutually agreed upon between the student and the company when
finalizing the apprenticeship.
5. Mode of apprenticeship: Remote or On-site: This will depend on the company’s
policy.

6. Pre-placement Offer: On successful completion of the apprenticeship, companies will
have the option to give a pre-placement offer to the students.
7. Payment of fees:
The fee for credit transfer is fixed as Rs 5000/- per credit for Apprenticeship. When
students opt to credit this at the BS level, they have to pay the credit transfer fee at the
time of registration.
Please refer the link to know more about Apprenticeship:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQ_ZCTw1_PzVDBJ7u-wX18KUgl-IK
1POIYRvyjAYsj_A-tS99K7ARRuNVKk0tp34B1woqclNxvY_0Lc/pub
18. Software and Hardware Requirements Mandatory System Specifications
The following are the essential requirements that are recommended to pursue the BSc Degree
program from IIT Madras
1
. Please note that there will be updates in some of the specifications
with changes happening in technology.
Hardware
To enroll and study in the program, every student is required to have a laptop or desktop with
the minimum configuration being as follows:
1. RAM Size - 8 GB or higher (The ability to install more memory is desirable).
2. Processor - Intel 8th Generation or AMD 4th Generation or upwards or its equivalent
(The latest processor configuration is always recommended)
3. Storage - Minimum of 500 GB, Desirable of 1 TB. Having an SSD storage is desirable.
4. Screen size and resolution - Minimum of 13” for laptop and Minimum of 15” for desktop
with 1080p
5. Webcamera, a mic and speaker or an earphone/headphone with mic.
Software/Applications
1. Operating System - Minimum requirement of Windows 10 or Ubuntu LTS Version
20.04 (or any equivalent) or Mac OS Mojave. Having the capability of dual boot is
desirable. If there is no capability for dual boot, then the operating system must
support virtualization software like VirtualBox using which Ubuntu 20.04 can be
emulated. The System Commands course in Semester 4 will be taught primarily on
Ubuntu 20.04.
2. Browser - Latest version of Chrome with Google Account signed in
1
3. Basic familiarity with Google Suite of tools (Docs, Sheets and Slides), specifically
collaboration features.
4. Any other software that is specified within the course
Internet Bandwidth
Minimum of 2 MBPS connection is required to attend sessions without disruptions. However
we strongly recommend broadband connections with much higher bandwidth for the best
learning experience.

For Online Interactions/Proctored Examinations
1. Browser - Latest version of Chrome is desirable
2. Mobile with a front camera and good internet connection (VOLTE connections are
ideal)
3. Mic and speaker to be able to speak to and listen to the person at the other end
4. Any applications as required to be installed for the interactions/examinations
System compatibility test
All students have to mandatorily attend the system compatibility test and ensure that the
system you have conforms to the above requirements and student has to participate in this on
the dates mentioned by the Admin team to get this completed.
Other References
Some more helpful links that will help you in understanding possible system configurations:
1. https://towardsdatascience.com/20-necessary-requirements-of-a-perfect-laptop-for-dat
a-science-and-machine-learning-tasks-7d0c59c3cb63
2. https://www.practicaldatascience.org/html/buying_datascience_computer.html
3. https://www.umass.edu/it/support/hardware/recommended-minimum-computer-configu
rations-windows
4. https://www.du.edu/it/support/how-to/students/laptops
5. https://wmich.edu/cs/laptop-requirements

Quiz 1

Quiz 2

End term OPPE1
exam

OPPE2
Day 1

OPPE2
Day2

7 July 2024,
Sunday

4 August
2024,
Sunday

1 Sep 2024,
Sunday

Aug 18 2024

Aug 25 2024

2pm-6pm*

2pm-6pm*

9am-12pm,
2pm-5pm

July 21 2024

In centres

In centres

In centres

Online
remote
proctored

Online
remote
proctored

Online
remote
proctored

*(If required and, we will do a morning session for the quiz)
ASSIGNMENT DEADLINES:
NONE OF THE ASSIGNMENT DEADLINES WILL BE CHANGED THIS TIME FROM THE
SCHEDULE GIVEN BELOW.
THE DATES HAVE BEEN SUFFICIENTLY ADJUSTED FOR ACCOMMODATING THE
QUIZZES AND OPPES.
Content Release
Dates

Assignment deadlines
Foundation

Assignment deadlines
Diploma

Week 1

Friday, May 31, 2024

Wednesday, June 12, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Week 2

Friday, June 7, 2024

Wednesday, June 19, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Week 3

Friday, June 14, 2024

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

Sunday, June 23, 2024

Week 4

Friday, June 21, 2024

Wednesday, July 3, 2024

Sunday, June 30, 2024

Week 5

Friday, June 28, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

Week 6

Friday, July 5, 2024

Wednesday, July 17, 2024

Monday, July 22, 2024

Week 7

Friday, July 12, 2024

Wednesday, July 24, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Week 8

Friday, July 19, 2024

Wednesday, July 31, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Week 9

Friday, July 26, 2024

Sunday, August 11, 2024

Sunday, August 11, 2024

Week 10

Friday, August 2, 2024 Wednesday, August 21, 2024

Tuesday, August 20, 2024

Week 11

Friday, August 9, 2024 Wednesday, August 21, 2024

Tuesday, August 20, 2024

Week 12

Friday, August 9, 2024 Wednesday, August 28, 2024

Wednesday, August 28,
2024

ASSIGNMENT DEADLINES:
Bonus Marks
1. Mathematics for data science 1
2. English 1
3. Computational Thinking
4. Statistics for data science 1
Extra Activity for Statistics- I Assignment Deadline
5. Mathematics for data science 2
6. English 2
7. Intro to python programming
8. Statistics for data science 2
Extra Activity for Statistics- II Assignment Deadline

Suggested pathway to register and study Diploma level courses:
PLEASE NOTE:
Python exams will be scheduled for the students in one of the 3 slots given here. Please keep
yourself available on that date.
OPPEs for all Diploma courses will be scheduled in the following way:
a. If you have 2 courses with OPPEs, both will be scheduled on August 18 2024.
b. If you have 3 courses with OPPEs, OPPEs for 2 courses will be scheduled on August 18
2024 and OPPE for 1 course will be scheduled on August 25 2024.
c. If you have 4 courses with OPPEs, OPPEs for 2 courses will be scheduled on August 18
2024 and OPPE for the other 2 courses will be scheduled on August 25 2024.
Diploma level courses
1. Machine Learning foundations (DS Diploma)
2. Machine Learning Techniques (Diploma in DS)
3. Machine Learning Practice (Diploma in DS)
4. Business Data management (DS Diploma)
5. Business Analytics (Diploma in DS)
Business Analytics (BA) Assignment Deadlines
6. Tools in Data Science (Diploma in DS)
7. Programming Data structures and algorithms using Python (PDSA) - Diploma in
Programming
8. Database management system (DBMS) - Diploma in Programming
9. Application development - 1 (Diploma in programming)
10. Programming concepts using Java (Diploma in programming)
11. System commands (Diploma in programming)
12. Application Development - 2 (Diploma in programming)
Project Courses:
Timelines (Appdev1, Appdev2 & MLP, BDM projects):
Degree Level courses
1. Software Testing
2. Software Engineering
3. Deep Learning
4. AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving
5. Strategies for Professional Growth
6. Data Visualization
7. Introduction to Big Data
8. Operating Systems
9. Programming in C
10. Deep Learning for Computer Vision
12. Algorithmic Thinking in Bioinformatics
13. Industry 4.0
14. Financial Forensics
15. Mathematical Thinking
16. Linear Statistical Models
17. Advanced Algorithms
● 18. Special topics in ML (Reinforcement Learning)
19. Game Theory and Strategy
Annexure I
Table.1 Schedule for Elective courses

Bonus Marks
Course Participation Marks are for encouraging and incentivising the students to participate
more in the activities of the course.
These marks will be added ONLY for the students who pass the course and will only impact the
course grade, and not the pass criteria. Criteria for course participation marks:
Marks will be applicable based on availability of mock activities in the course. It can vary from
course to course and can range from 0-2.
​ If the average of the marks obtained in all the mock tests conducted before Quiz
1 & Quiz 2 >= 40/100, students will get 2 marks. The mock tests have to be done
within the time specified.
​ The course team may setup additional activities in the course which will be eligible
for upto 3 bonus marks.
Participation in the discourse forum: Badges
We will be looking at active engagement with Discourse in a term and provide badges for
participation.
Badges will be given based on the number of hours a student spends on Discourse. A student is
expected to spend a minimum of 1 hour per week per course in Discourse reading posts.
Student will get the following badges:
Read time of upto 4 hours per course in a term: Badge 1
Read time of upto 8 hours per course in a term: Badge 2
Read time of upto 12 hours per course or more: Badge 3
(Applicable only after you get the BS student roll number)
INFORMATION ABOUT GRADES of COURSES:
S,A,B,C,D,E - Pass grade; U- Fail grade
In I grade - there are 3 types:
​ If you are absent for ET alone with all other assessment components completed
(quizzes, OPPEs, project, weekly assignments) - grade will be pushed as I.
Options: You can register to take up ET exam alone in the subsequent term. OPPE and
quizzes will not be scheduled for you. All other marks for Final course score will be
taken from the previous run.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE but wrote the ET exam and crossed the cutoff for
T as given in the course grading policy, grade = I_OP.
You can register to do the OPPE alone whereby if the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You can attempt
the OPPE alone. All other mark components of FInal course score will be taken from the
previous run. ET and quizzes will not be scheduled for you.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE and absent for ET, then grade = I_BOTH
You can register to ET and OPPEs alone. If the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You will attempt
the ET and OPPEs. Quiz and GAA and other components will be taken from the
previous run and not scheduled.

In all the above cases, you can also choose to Repeat the entire course and not just do
the ET/OPPE alone if you want to reattempt all assessment components.

Suggested pathway to register and study Foundation level
courses:

For those entering Foundation Level in May 2024, kindly go through the new rules: 4/6/8
courses to be completed in 4/6/9 terms. Else you will be removed from the program.

Foundation level courses
1. Mathematics for data science 1
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

2. English 1
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

3. Computational Thinking
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

4. Statistics for data science 1
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2) +
Bonus marks for Extra activity - capped to 5
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).
Bonus marks for course specific activity: 5 marks in total - 3.75 marks for weekly extra
activity + 1.25 marks based on the quality of activity (Instructors' and Faculty's discretion)

Extra Activity for Statistics- I Assignment Deadline
Note: If a student does not complete the required number peer review, he/she will be awarded 0
marks for that activity even if he/she submitted the activity.
Extra activity

Release date for
extra activity

End date of
submission

End date for peer
review

Extra Activity 1

Friday, July 12, 2024

Wednesday, July 24, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Extra Activity 2

Friday, July 12, 2024

Wednesday, July 24, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Extra Activity 3

Friday, July 26, 2024

Wednesday, August 7, 2024

Sunday, August 11,
2024

Extra Activity 4

Friday, August 9,
2024

Wednesday, August 21,
2024

Sunday, August 25,
2024

5. Mathematics for data science 2
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

6. English 2
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

7. Intro to python programming
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

No Quiz2 for this course.

End term: Sep 1st 2024

OPPE1: Sunday, July 21, 2024 (08:00 to 09:30 AM, 10:30 to 12:00 PM, 04:30 to 06:00 PM)
OPPE2: Sunday, August 25, 2024 (10:00 AM - 11:30 AM, 01:30 PM - 03:00 PM, 04:30 PM - 06:00 PM)
For Both OPPE1 & OPPE2, out of the 3 slots one will be allocated from IITM. Please keep
yourself free on the dates given.
OPPE 1 will be scheduled for ALL who enrolled to the course
Eligibility to appear for the OPPE 2:
If the Average of the scores of the best 5 out of the first 6 Weekly programming assignments
(GrPA) >= 40/100
AND
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
then we will schedule the OPPE2 for you. If you do not satisfy this, we will not schedule OPPE2
for you.
Eligibility to appear for the final exam is as follows:
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Both the conditions below should be satisfied.
​ Attending the end term exam AND

​

Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming exams (OPPE1,
OPPE2) should be >= 40/100 The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
GAA1 = Average score in Best 10 objective assignments out of First 11 graded objective
assignments
GAA2 = Average score in Best 10 programming assignments out of First 11 graded
programming assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted) - in centre
PE1 = score in OPPE1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1
PE2 = score in OPPE2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1 GAA1 (objective) + 0.1GAA2 (programming) + 0.1Qz1+ 0.4F+ 0.25 max(PE1, PE2) +
0.15 min(PE1, PE2) — capped to 100
OPE1/
OPE2

ET

T

Grade

Possibilities for student

1.

Absent

Absent

-

U

Repeat the course.

2.

Absent

Present

>=35

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term;Both
oppes will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried
over
OR
Repeat the entire course

<35

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term, Both
oppes will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried
over
OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I_BOTH

Complete ET and OPE in next term,
Both oppes will be scheduled.
GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

3.
4

Present
score<
40/100

Present

5
6

7

Present
Score >
40/100

8

Present

Grade as per the Total score T

8. Statistics for data science 2
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2) +
Bonus marks for Extra activity - capped to 5
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).
Bonus marks for course specific activity: 5 marks in total - 3.75 marks for weekly extra
activity + 1.25 marks based on the quality of activity (Instructors' and Faculty's discretion)

Extra Activity for Statistics- II Assignment Deadline
Note: If a student does not complete the required number peer review, he will be awarded 0
marks for that activity even if he/she submitted the activity.
Extra activity

Release date for
extra activity

End date of submission

End date for peer
review

Extra Activity 1

Friday, May 31, 2024

Wednesday, June 12, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Extra Activity 2

Friday, May 31, 2024

Wednesday, June 12, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Extra Activity 3

Friday, June 14, 2024

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

Sunday, June 30, 2024

Extra Activity 4

Friday, June 28, 2024

Wednesday, July 10, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

Extra Activity 5

Friday, July 12, 2024

Wednesday, July 24, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Friday, July 26, 2024

Wednesday, August 7, 2024

Sunday, August 11,
2024

Extra Activity 6

Suggested pathway to register and study Diploma level
courses:
​

Most aggressive pathway - completing in 4 terms - ONLY IF YOU ARE
DOING THIS AS FULL TIME AND NOTHING ELSE AND CAN SPEND 70 HRs
PER WEEK MINIMUM
​ Comfortable pathway - 6 terms - 2 years : Suggested for students and working
professionals doing this along with another degree or their job (40hrs/week)
​ Those from non technical backgrounds, new to programming or have busy
schedules, recommended to take 6 or 7 terms for the 2 diplomas.
​ Same sequence of courses are suggested if you are taking only the Diploma in
programming or Diploma in DS separately too.
Maximum number of terms to complete both Diplomas: 12

Even with a relaxed pathway, you should complete a maximum of 7 or 8 terms.
The new rules for those entering Diploma Level in May 2024: Complete 3/6/9/12 courses
and 1/2/3/4 projects at the end of 3/6/9/12 terms.
If you wish to do the Diploma in programming and Diploma in data science one after the
other and not mix up the courses, here are the suggested pathways.

OPPE SCHEDULE (MAY 2024 TERM)
am

Timing

hon

MS

SA

a

P

SUNDAY JULY 21 2024

E1
y 1)

to 09:30 AM

A

to 12:00 PM

B

to 01:00 PM
to 03:30 PM

C

to 06:30 PM

A
SUNDAY AUGUST 18 2024

E2
y 1)

M to 10:00 AM

S

o Big Data

M to 12:00 PM

A

M to 12:30 PM
M to 03:30 PM

A
B

M to 04:00 PM

B

M to 06:30 PM

A
SUNDAY AUGUST 25 2024

M to 10:00 AM
M to 12:00 PM

2A

M to 01:00 PM A
E2
y 2)

M to 12:00 PM

C

M to 03:30 PM B
M to 06:30 PM

C

M to 06:00 PM C

PLEASE NOTE:
Python exams will be scheduled for the students in one of the 3 slots given here. Please keep
yourself available on that date.
Grading pattern has changed for Python this term - Weekly timed assignments is removed.

OPPEs for all Diploma courses will be scheduled in the following way:

​
​

If you have 2 courses with OPPEs, both will be scheduled on August 18 2024.
If you have 3 courses with OPPEs, OPPEs for 2 courses will be scheduled on
August 18 2024 and OPPE for 1 course will be scheduled on August 25 2024.

​

If you have 4 courses with OPPEs, OPPEs for 2 courses will be scheduled on
August 18 2024 and OPPE for the other 2 courses will be scheduled on August
25 2024.

Pattern for OPPE for System Commands has changed from previous terms - Please check.
Only if you have a conflicting engagement on 18 August 2024, which cannot be changed
or moved and you submit a request to us with proof, we will check the proofs and if
found valid, we will make changes to the above allocation. Since both August 18 and
August 25 are Sundays, please ensure you keep it free, especially as per the time slots
given here for giving the exams.
June 30: We will release the slots allocated for each student for their registered subjects .
If eligibility is specified as part of the grading document to attend the exam and if you are
eligible, exam will be scheduled as per the slots allocated.
Please choose courses for May 2024 term keeping all these points in mind.

Diploma level courses

1. Machine Learning foundations (DS Diploma)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to attend final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get the final course grade: Attending the end sem exam
The calculation of Final course Score is proposed as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
Overall score for eligible students:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

2. Machine Learning Techniques (Diploma in DS)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.

Eligibility to attend the end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly
assessments (objective) scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the
centre
Eligibility to get the course grade: Attending the end sem exam
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
Total course score T = 0.1 GAA for Weekly MCQ + 0.4F + Max(0.25 Qz1 + 0.25 Qz2,
0.4max(Qz1,Qz2))
(Though the W12 assignment score is not included in GAA, W12 contents will be included for
the final exam. Hence please practice and submit on W12 assignment).

3. Machine Learning Practice (Diploma in DS)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to attend the end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the 9 weekly
assessments (objective and programming) scores >= 40/100 and attending atleast one of the 2
quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get the course grade: Attending the end sem exam AND one programming exam
with score in programming exam >= 40/100
Online programming exam 1: – (OPE1) July 21 2024 (04:30 to 06:30 PM IST), Sunday
Online programming exam 2: – (OPE2) August 18th 2024 (04:30 to 06:30 PM IST), Sunday
GAA = score in Best 10 out of first 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
OPE1 - Score in online remote proctored programming exam
OPE2 - Score in online remote proctored programming exam
NPE1, NPE2 - Score in Non proctored programming exam
F = score in final exam
Total course score T = 0.1GAA + 0.3F+ +0.15 OPE1 + 0.15 OPE2 + Max(0.15Qz1 + 0.15Qz2,
0.2max(Qz1,Qz2)) + Bonus (0.025 NPE1 + 0.025 NPE2)
OPE1/OPE2

ET

T

Grade

Next steps

1.

Absent

Absent

-

U

Repeat the entire course

2.

Absent
(OPE1 and
OPE2=0)

Present

>=35

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term,
Both OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

3.
4

Present
score<
40/100

<35

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Redo OPE alone next term. Both
OPPE will be scheduled,
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I_BOTH

Redo End term exam and OPE alone
in next term. Both OPPE will be
scheduled for you. GA, quiz will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next term,
OPPE will NOT be scheduled;
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Present

5
6

7

Present
Score >
40/100

8

Present

Grade as per the Total score T

4. Business Data management (DS Diploma)
NO Quiz 1

NO Quiz 2

End term: Sep 1st 2024: to be attended in person at designated centres.
There will be no Quiz 1 or Quiz 2 for BDM in the May 2024 term.
There will be 11 weekly assignments designed for this of 10 Marks each.
Eligibility to take the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100
Eligibility to get the final course grade: Attending the end sem exam AND average of best
7/11 weekly assignments >= 30/70
Components of evaluation for final course score T=0.7GA +0.30F
​ 70 marks (GA)
​ Totally 11 weekly assignments will be released - 10 Marks each
​ Out of 11 assignments given, best 7 will be considered
​ Assignment marks= 7x10 = 70 marks
​ 30 marks(F): End sem exam (in person in centers)
No Bonus Marks for BDM

5. Business Analytics (Diploma in DS)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
There will be no regular weekly graded assignments being designed for this course. Instead
there are 3 course assignments.
Eligibility to take the final exam:
Submission of at least 1 out of the first two assignments - Asgn 1 and Asgn 2
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the end term exam AND End term exam score
F >=10/40
20 marks: In center quiz - 20 marks (Qz)
Quiz 1 will be from Week 1-4
Quiz 2 will be from Week 3-8
Quiz Marks = 0.7*Max(Qz1, Qz2) + 0*3Min(Qz1, Qz2)
40 Marks: 3 Assignments for a total of 40 marks :
Assignment 1: 20 marks
Assignment 2: 20 marks
Assignment 3: 20 marks
A = Sum of the Best 2 out of (Assignment 1, Assignment 2, Assignment 3)
40 Marks (F): End Term Exam
​ Will be set to 45 marks and students can attempt all.
​ Marks obtained will be capped at 40.
​ The syllabus for the End term exam will be the contents covered in Weeks 1 to
12

Business Analytics (BA) Assignment Deadlines
Week no.

Release date

Submission date

5

Friday, June 28, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

6

Friday, July 5, 2024

Monday, July 22, 2024

9

Friday, July 26, 2024

Sunday, August 11, 2024

6. Tools in Data Science (Diploma in DS)
No in centre quizzes for this course.
End term exam: Sep 1st 2024 - to be attended in person at designated centres.

ROE1: July 20 2024 8PM
Eligibility to attend the end term exam: Average of best 3 out of the first 5 weekly
assessment scores >= 40/100
Eligibility to get the course grade: Attending end-term exam

GAA = score in best 5 of 6 weekly assignments on the portal (open internet, MCQs)
F = Final end term exam (no internet, in-person, mandatory).
P1 and P2 will have two components - Submissions and peer reviews with weightage
80:20.
Final course score T = 0.1GAA + 0.2 ROE1 + 0.2 P1 + 0.2P2 + 0.3F
Assessment

Open date

Submission date

Peer Review
Date

ROE1

Remote Online Exam 1
(45 mins, open
internet, Objective
assessments)

8:00 PM July
20,2024

8:45 PM July
20,2024

-

P1

take home project 1
(open internet)

Friday, June 28,
2024

Monday, Jul 8,
2024

Sunday, Jul
14, 2024

P2

take home project 2
(open internet)

Friday, July 12,
2024

Sunday, July 21,
2024

Sunday, July
28, 2024

7. Programming Data structures and algorithms using
Python (PDSA) - Diploma in Programming
Weekly assignments: Mix of autograded assignment and Programming assignments
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024 Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024
End term: Sep 1st 2024
Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
1 programming exam of 120 minutes duration - Online remote proctored - (August 18th 2024)
(If you are absent for the OPPE, then Repeat OPPE will NOT be provided in the next term as this does
not impact passing the course, only total course score)

Eligibility for attending end sem exams: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly
assessments (objective and programming) scores >= 40/100 AND attending atleast one of the 2
quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get the final course grade: Attendance in the End sem exam
The calculation of Final course Score is proposed as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 9 out of First 10 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
OP = Score in Online proctored remote exam

F = score in final exam
Overall score for eligible students:
T = 0.1GAA +0.4F+0.2OP+ max(0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), (0.15Qz1+0.15Qz2 ))

8. Database management system (DBMS) - Diploma in
Programming
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments
scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade:
Attending the End sem exam AND scoring a minimum of 35% in the OPE (overall) AND Getting
the question based on Python-DB connectivity correct is mandatory to get the course grade.
(The OPE will be based on SQL query(Week 2-3) and Python-Database connectivity(Week 7).)
If you dont get the 35% in OPE OR dont pass the Python-DB connectivity question, you will be
given Fail in the OPE.)
Assessment Type

Method

Proctoring

% of Total
Score T

Week 1-12

100% objective

NA

GA

Weekly assessments,
Weeks 2,3

PostgreSQL assignments will be
considered.

None

GAA2

Week 7

Programming assignment

NA

GAA3

Quiz 1 : Weeks 1-4 July

Objective

In person at TCS
centres

Qz1
Qz2

Objective

In person at TCS
centres
Online remote
proctored

OPE1

August 18 2024

Testing will be on SQL queries and
python-database connections Students will be given the option to
choose the date and slot. Based on
logistics the slots will be allocated.

End Sem Sep 1 2024

100% Objective

In-person at TCS
centres

F

7th, 2024
Quiz 2 Weeks 1-8 August

4th, 2024
Online remote proctored
exam (OPE1)

The calculation of Final course Score is proposed as follows:
GAA1 = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
GAA2= Average score of week 2 and 3 SQL based assignments
GAA3= Average score of week 7 programming assignment
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)

OPE1 - Score in online remote proctored programming exam
F = score in final exam
Overall score for eligible students:
T = 0.04GAA1 + 0.03GAA2 + 0.03GAA3 + 0.2OP + max (0.45F+0.15max(Qz1, Qz2),
0.4F+(0.10Qz1+0.20Qz2 ))
OPE

ET

T

Grade

1.

Absent

Absent

-

U

Repeat the course.

2.

Absent

Present

>=35

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term
(only one oppe in this course)
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<35

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term
(only one oppe in this course)
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I_BOTH

Complete ET exam and OPE in
next term, (only one oppe in this
course)
GA and quiz marks will be carried
over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next term;
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

Actual
grade

Grade as per the Total score T

3.
4

5

Present
score<
35/100
OR
Python-DB
question
Incorrect.

6

7

8

Present
Score >
35/100
AND
Python-DB
question
correct.

Present

Present

9. Application development - 1 (Diploma in programming)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.

Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments
(objective) scores >= 40/100 and attending atleast one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Assessment Type

Method

Proctoring

Contribution to
final score

Lab assignments,
Weeks 2 - 7

100% Lab assignments
auto evaluated via
framework (weekly
assignments)

None

GLA
Best 5 out of 6,
[2,3,4,5,6,7]

Objective Assignments,
Weeks 1 - 12

100% objective

None

GA : Best 10 out of
First 11

Quiz 1 and 2 , July 7th,
2024
and August 4th, 2024

Objective and subjective
questions

In person at TCS
centers

Qz1, Qz2

End Sem, Sep 1st 2024

Objective

In person at TCS
centers

F

Final course score T = 0.15 GLA + 0.05GA+ Max(0.35 F + 0.2 Qz1 + 0.25 Qz2, 0.4 F + 0.3
Best(Qz1,Qz2))

10. Programming concepts using Java (Diploma in
programming)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
OPPE: All students will be allocated for OPPE on July 21
Eligibility to attend the end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly
assessments (objective and programming) scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2
quizzes in the center
Eligibility to get the course grade: Attending the end term exam AND one programming exam
with a minimum score of 30%.
Assessment Type

Components

Mode

Code

Weeks 1 - 12
Weekly Objective Assessments

Objective Questions

On Course Portal

Weeks 2 - 8
Weekly Programming
Assignments

Programming Questions

On Course Portal

GAA

Quiz 1 - July 7th, 2024
Weeks 1-4

Objective + subjective

In TCS centers

Qz1
Qz2

Quiz 2 - August 4th, 2024
Weeks 1-8
Online Proctored Examination 1

July 21 (syllabus weeks 1-6)
Online Proctored Examination 2

Programming Questions
Any one of the 2 slots will be
allocated based on student
preference and logistics..

On Course Portal

PE1
PE2

Objective

In TCS centers

F

18th Any one slot will be
allocated (syllabus weeks
1-9)
End Sem - Sep 1st 2024
Weeks 1-12

GAA = average of score in Best 6 out of 7 programming graded assignments given
Final course score T = 0.1GAA + 0.3F+ 0.2 of Max(PE1,PE2)+ (Bonus)0.10 Min(PE1,PE2)+
max (0.25 Max(Qz1,Qz2), 0.15Qz1+0.25Qz2) —----------- capped to 100
OPE1/OPE2

ET

T

Grade

1.

Absent

Absent

-

U

2.

Absent (PE1
and PE2=0)

Present

>=35

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next
term,
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<35

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Redo OPE alone in next term,
GA, quiz and ET marks will be
carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I_BOTH

Redo End term exam and
OPE alone in next term.
GA, quiz will be carried over.
OR
Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next
term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks
will be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

3.
4

Present
score<
30/100

Present

5
6

7

8

Present
Score >
30/100

Present

Grade as per the Total score
T

11. System commands (Diploma in programming)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

NO Quiz 2

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Biweekly Programming Tests (BPT) Release Dates June 15, June 29 July 13, July 27, August
10 2024
Biweekly Programming Tests (BPT) Due Dates June 16, June 30, July 14, July 28, August 11
2024
Quiz 1 Syllabus - Week 1 to Week 4
Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to attend the end term exam:
Average of the best 7 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming)
scores >= 40/100 and successfully attempt at least 3 out of first 4 BPTs
Eligibility to get the course grade:
Attending the end semester exam and one programming exam (OPPE), with a score >= 40/100
We are NOT going to have 2 OPPEs going forward. It is going to be ONE OPPE based on
weeks 1-9.
Students have to mandatorily attend the OPPE on the first date.
​

If you fail in this, you get a chance to reappear the next weekend. So you get 2
chances to attempt the exam.

​

If the first date is inconvenient due to a clash with some other engagement, then
you can apply for a postponement to the second date providing sufficient proof. If
this is accepted, your exam will be moved to the second date but if you fail in this,
you will not get another chance to reattempt. You will have to do it in the
subsequent term.
NPPE [Syllabus Weeks 1-9]: Aug 16, 2024
GAA = Average of score in Best 7 out of all weekly graded assignments
BPT = Biweekly Programming Tests
​ Each BPT have 4 programming questions
​ Will be released on Saturday 12.00 am and closed on Sunday 11:59 pm (2 days)
​ Will be conducted in the course VM
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
OPE = Score in online remote proctored programming exam
​ One additional attempt will be provided only if score < 40 in first attempt
F = score in End Term exam
Final course score T = 0.15 GAA + 0.2 Qz1 + 0.3 OPE + 0.3 F + 0.2 BPT — (Capped to 100)

1.

OPE1/OPE2

ET

T

Grade

Absent

Absent

-

U

2.

Absent
(OPE1 and
OPE2=0)

Present

>=35

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next
term, Both attempts will be
given;
GA, quiz and ET marks will
be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<35

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next
term, Both attempts will be
given;
GA, quiz and ET marks will
be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I_Both

Redo End term exam and 2
OPE alone in next term;
GA, quiz will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next
term;
OPPE will NOT be given in
this case.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks
will be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course

3.
4

Present
score<
40/100

Present

5
6

7

Present
Score >
40/100

8

Present

Grade as per the Total score
T

12. Application Development - 2 (Diploma in programming)
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments
scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Assessment Type

Method

Proctoring

Percentage
contribution

Weekly assessments

100% objective

None

GAA1 = 5 marks

Weeks 1 - 11
Programming
Assignments
Weeks 1 and 2

Auto Evaluated

None

GAA2 = 5 marks

Quiz 1 - July 7th, Qz1
Quiz 2 - August 4th, Qz2

Objective + Descriptive

In person at TCS
centers

Qz1, Qz2

End Sem - Sep 1st, F

100% Objective

In person at TCS
centers

F

GAA1 = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
GAA2 - Average of weeks 1 and 2 programming assignments
Final course score T = 0.05 GAA1 + 0.05 GAA2 + Max(0.35 * F + 0.25 * Qz1 + 0.3 * Qz2, 0.5 * F + 0.3 *
Best(Qz1, Qz2))

Project Courses:
Project courses are now for 2 credits each - BDM, MLP, App Dev 1 and App Dev 2.
The Project courses are not part of CCC. The CCC is only for theory courses.
App Dev1 Theory is a co-requisite for App Dev 1 project.
App Dev1 project is a corequisite for App Dev2 Theory.
App Dev2 Theory is a corequisite for App Dev2 Project.
MLP course is a co-requisite for MLP project.
BDM course is a co-requisite for BDM project.
MLP: If you have completed MLP Theory course in jan 2024 or May 2024 and complete MLP
project in May 2024, we will evaluate your project for 105 marks and cap it to 100. This policy is
subject to change in the Sep 2024 term.
App dev 1 and 2: If you have completed Appdev1/Appdev2 Theory courses in jan 2024 or May
2024 and complete the corresponding projects in May 2024, we will evaluate your project for
120 marks and cap it to 100. This policy is subject to change in the Sep 2024 term.
BDM project will be evaluated only out of 100 marks for all students, irrespective of the term
submitted in.
Each project has its own modalities and processes to be followed.
There will be fortnightly assessments configured in the MLP project course alone that you have
to submit. We will be using this information to cross check your engagement in the course.
Please check your course announcements for the project timelines and make the submissions
accordingly.
Guideline documents:
BDM:
1. General instructions on preparing report :
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vTzF1dpoe40s7mSD633u_fTE1knPer32LyFxN
wb978rGtMDO45Hny4KLmN2kKmN0A/pub
2. Capstone Project Rubrics for Analysis with Primary Data

https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vShnBLNHmdbVlpoK9y0Fb_5ew5rKNJpYmAJ3
HJG4rK1rRWwnKbzzqKGJcX9iGFctA/pub
3. Capstone Project Rubrics for Analysis with Secondary Data
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vRuykh6558Gsw5yZmwu3xs_sbF97aMcC2NN
2YEnd4D5xS8mKUQn5onkKuzOyzO1xA/pub
MLP:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vRZo5Ztme5VrT_P1Mybt5FT8uIJdn_ySp9jAZd7hV
8j7lNEFcZj7yL_Espdgp8Cj6J5Mn1jzaIKZkt-/pub
Appdev1:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQpC1dcw3suVePh-AciGbgxETnvIJv6c1N1qwjCSf
FqX1HZ_HlXjJxS8RYuUHfTjKTHRd1c7Xx6Ytw-/pub
Appdev2:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQDIEjqdQqzVcpWhG4lko72ycIL4E3-iIDh2wapVl90
h7TSkKMdzgqRKZ0usXnDY97xwVfrZffh4lKI/pub
Rules regarding project fees:
The fee paid for each of the 4 projects is valid for 2 terms.
Fee details for Project:
Category

Payment

Category
Waiver

Grade

New Registration

2500

Yes

Actual
grade

Fee for Level 2 reattempt (only for MLP)
(There is no reattempt for Level2 for Appdev1 and
Appdev2)

1000

No

Actual
grade

If the project is not completed in the registered term - the
fee is retained for the subsequent term, grade will be
marked as I.
. If the project is not completed in the second term also,
then the registration becomes invalid and the student has
to pay the full fees again, you will get a U grade.

2500

Yes

I or U

If the student fails in the project,
Students have to redo the project by registering to the
project by paying the full fees

2500

Yes

U

If the student fails in the project or the submission is
found to be Plagiarized,
​ Student maybe subjected to disciplinary
action
​ Student has to redo the project by
registering to the project by paying the
full fees.

2500

Yes

U

Timelines (Appdev1, Appdev2 & MLP, BDM projects):
Here are the timelines for students doing projects in the May 2024 terms who will be entering
Degree level in the Sep 2024 term. Without completing the 12 courses and 4 projects, you
cannot start degree level courses from Sep 2024 onwards.
For entering the Degree level in Sep 2024, you have to complete ALL projects and vivas
by August 2024.
BDM project final submission has to be done and approved by July/August 2024 so that
viva can be over in August 2024.
Project grade for all the courses will be pushed on/before Aug 31st.
Viva planner - Jan 2024 term :
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vS9keZ1fpyfSsQYXWeKrol1-t66dbz4l552N
Q4hvwFguYVdQCgIoo4i8pK7QgUybfaYtRSonHDbbDw9/pubhtml
Students who completed App dev1, App dev2, MLP and BDM in Sep 2021/Jan 2022 terms:
If you complete the 6 courses and 2 projects of any of the two Diploma, you will get the Diploma
certificates. But your credits will not be 27 for this Diploma but 23 or 25 depending on how many
of these courses were completed in these 2 terms. The projects done as part of the courses of
Sep 2021/Jan 2022 will not get the 2 credits. So there is no issue with the Diploma level.
When you come to the BSc level, 114 credits are required to obtain the BSc certificate. Hence
this deficit of 2/4/6/8 credits will have to be made up by taking more elective courses offered by
the IITM BS program.

Degree Level courses
Level of the course:
Please check the course code. The first digit represents the level of the course. Eg: CT is
CS1001 is a 1 level course.
Deep Learning is CS3004 and is a 3 level course.
Reinforcement Learning is CS4002 is a 4 level course.
BSc level:
It is now mandatory that students have to complete both the core pairs and SPG in the BSc
level. Credits = 20
All 8 credits can be earned from IITM BS courses or NPTEL (maximum upto 4 credits from
Table 2) or if there is an option to credit campus courses, that too can be done.
This will be implemented wef Sep 2023 for the batch that enters the degree level in Sep
2023.
BS level:
2 courses in the level 4 or higher should be mandatorily completed in each of the BP and BD
categories. Please refer course category in table1

Out of the remaining 12 credits, it is MANDATORY to earn 4 credits in the HS/MG category.
HS/MG can come from inhouse electives or from NPTEL-Table 3.
Remaining credits are from any of the other in-house/campus electives or Apprenticeship
electives.
Apprenticeship:
Apprenticeship is completely optional. Students can complete the BS level by just doing only
course work.
Recommendation on taking additional courses and learning more skills not taught directly in the
program curriculum.
​ C++ programming - Prof Partha Das, IIT Kgp https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs50/preview
​ Introduction To Haskell Programming - Prof. S. P Suresh CMI https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs94/preview
​ Competitive programming - Prof. Neeldhara Misra, IIT Gn https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs30/preview
​ Cloud computing - Prof SK Ghosh, IIT Kgp https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs42/preview
​ Blockchain and its applications - Prof. Sandip Chakraborty & Prof. Shamik Sural,
IIT Kgp - https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs47/preview
​ Compiler Design - Prof. Santanu Chattopadhyay, IIT M https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs14/preview
We are also collaborating with the Microsoft certification program team to offer their courses for
our students at discounted rates. Would be good to complete some cloud certifications from this
too when we offer it.
It is important you learn more on programming and data science outside of what the curriculum
offers and strengthen your resume.

1. Software Testing
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of best 5 out of first 9 weekly assessments scores
>= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F - score in End Term exam
T = 0.1GAA + 0.4F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2

2. Software Engineering
NO Quiz 1

Quiz 2: Aug 4 2024

End term:Sep 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam:
Average of the best 5 out of the first 7 weekly assignment scores >= 40/100 AND submission of
Group project Milestone [1-3]
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End term exam AND Submission of group
project (All milestones) is mandatory for course grade AND score in group project > 0
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = score in Best 9 out of first 10 graded assignments
Qz1 = NOT THERE IN THIS COURSE
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
Group Project- Milestone 1-3 (After week 6) - GP1
Group project - Milestone 4-6 (After week 12) - GP2
Project Presentation - PP
Course participation activity - CP
F - score in End Term exam
T = 0.05GAA + 0.2Qz2 + 0.4F+ 0.1GP1 + 0.1GP2 + 0.1PP + 0.05CP
(More details about the Group project will be given in the course).

3. Deep Learning
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Bonus Marks:
The average score of all (3) programming activity assignments will be used as Bonus marks.
Maximum bonus marks will be 5.

Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of best 5 out of first 9 weekly assessments scores
>= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F - score in End Term exam

T = 0.1GAA + Max((0.4F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2), 0.5F+ 0.3 Max(Qz1,Qz2))+ Bonus (as
applicable)

4. AI: Search Methods for Problem Solving
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of best 5 out of first 9 weekly assessments scores
>= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F - score in End Term exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.45F + 0.35max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2))
Bonus marks for those who pass the course: 5

​

Programming Assignment 1 will be released between Quiz 1 and Quiz 2. The dates will be
announced in the forum. This assignment will be evaluated offline.

5. Strategies for Professional Growth
Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of best 5 of the first 9 weeks' graded assignments;
>= 40/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end-term exam
The calculation of the final course score for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average of best 10 of the 11 weeks' graded assignments
GP = score in Group Project (0, if not participated)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted), based on weeks 1-7 (Subjective & Objective)
F = score in final exam, based on weeks 1-12 (Subjective & Objective)
T = Total score (out of 100)
T = 0.15*GAA + 0.25*GP + 0.25*Qz2 + 0.35*F
Project:

Milestone

Timeline

Submission
Date

Marks

Evaluation
and Score
Release

I

Week 1 to
Week 3

End of Week 3

50 marks

Before Week 5

II

Week 4 to
Week 6

End of Week 6

50 marks

Before
End-Term

More details about the Group Project will be given in the course.

6. Data Visualization
https://onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in/course_pages/BSCCS4001.html
Quiz 1 : July 7 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
End term exam: Not in centre, project based with presentation and viva
Eligibility to attend final exam: Average of the best 3 out of the 5 graded assignment scores
>= 40/100, and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre.
Eligibility to get the final course grade: Completing & presenting the Group Project (P) with
scoring more than 50/100 in it
GA: Sum of best 3 out of 5 Graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
P: Group project and presentation
Bonus: Maximum of 10 marks; 5 marks for each of the 2 Extra assignments

Total course score T = 0.3GA + Max(0.2Qz1+0.2Qz2, 0.3Max(Qz1,Qz2)) + 0.3P +
Bonus

7. Introduction to Big Data
Note: This course requires students to have access to link a credit card and avail $300 one
time free credit available for GOOGLE CLOUD platform. If you do not have either a credit card

or have availed the free Google Cloud credits, then it will not be possible for you to take up
this course.
Quiz 1 and Quiz 2: Not there

End term:Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres.
OPPE: August 25th 2024, 2pm-6pm, 4 hr exam
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 7 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam AND the OPPE
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 6 out of 9 weekly graded assignments
OPPE: August 25th 2024, 2pm-6pm, 4 hr exam
Quiz 1 and quiz 2 : Not applicable for this course
F = score in final exam
T = 0.25 GAA + 0.25 F + 0.5 OPPE

8. Operating Systems
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of first 11 weekly assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + 0.4F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2

9. Programming in C
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: No Quiz 2

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
For OPPE1, OPPE2 exam dates please refer to Annexure I

For OPPE 1 - July 21 (04:30 to 06:30 PM)
For OPPE 2 - Aug 18, 2024 4:30 PM(04:30 PM to 06:30 PM)

Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignments
(objective and programming) scores >= 40/100

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade:
Both the conditions below should be satisfied.
​

Attending the end term exam AND

​

Score in one of the two programming exams (OPPE1, OPPE2) should be
>= 40/100 - Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming
quizzes

Final course score calculation:
The calculation of Final course score for eligible students is as follows:
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of 11 weekly graded
assignments

​

GAAP = Average score in Best 7 out of 8 weekly graded programming
assignments (weeks 3-10)

​

Qz1 = score in Quiz 1 (0, if not attempted) - in centre

​

OPPE1 = score in OPPE 1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1

​

OPPE2 = score in OPPE 2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2

​

F = score in final End Term exam

T = 0.05GAA (objective) + 0.1GAAP + 0.15Qz1 + 0.20 OPPE1 + 0.20 OPPE2 + 0.30F

10. Deep Learning for Computer Vision
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of first 11 weekly assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1 GAA+ 0.5F + Max(0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2, 0.3 Max(Qz1,Qz2))

11. Managerial Economics
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 8 out of first 9 weekly assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

T = 0.15 GAA+ Max(0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2 + 0.45F, 0.5F + 0.25Max(Qz1,Qz2))

12. Algorithmic Thinking in Bioinformatics
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of first 11 weekly assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted), Syllabus: Week 1-4
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted), Syllabus: Week 5-8
F = score in final exam, Syllabus: Week 1-12

T = 0.2 GAA+ Max(0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2 + 0.4F, 0.45F+0.25Max(Qz1,Qz2))

13. Industry 4.0
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024 Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024 End term: Sep 1st 2024
Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to take the final exam:
Submission of at least 1 out of the first three assignments - Asgn 1, Asgn 2 and Asgn 3 AND
attending atleast one of the two quizzes AND participating the game
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the end term exam
15 marks: In center quiz – 7.5 marks for Quiz1 and 7.5 marks for Quiz 2
Quiz 1 on July 7th, 2024 and Quiz 2 on August 4th, 2024 (In person at centers)
Quiz 1 will be from Week 1-4
Quiz 2 will be from Week 5-8
5 Marks: Online game: Yield Management Game (estimated duration 1.5 – 2 hours )
4 marks for participating the game for the entire game horizon
1 bonus mark for top 10 participants in terms of the game performance measure
40 Marks: 3 Assignments for a total of 40 marks :
Assignment 1: 20 marks
Assignment 2: 20 marks
Assignment 3: 20 marks
A = Sum of the Best 2 out of (Assignment 1, Assignment 2, Assignment 3)
Week no.

Release date

Submission date

5

Friday, June 28,
2024

Sunday, July 14,
2024

6

Friday, July 5, 2024

Monday, July 22,
2024

9

Friday, July 26,
2024

Sunday, August 11,
2024

40 Marks (F): End Term Exam – Sep 1st 2024
Will be set to 45 marks and students can attempt all.
Marks obtained will be capped at 40.
The syllabus for the End term exam will be the contents covered in Weeks 1 to 12

14. Financial Forensics
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Remote Group Project 1: July 21st, 2024 to August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024
Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 50/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of all weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
GP1 = score in Group ProjectI (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

T = 0.1GAA + Max(0.25Qz1 + 0.25GP1 + 0.4F, 0.5F+0.3Max(Qz1,GP1))

15. Mathematical Thinking
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

16. Linear Statistical Models
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to attend final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 8 assignment scores >=
40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre

Eligibility to get the final course grade: Attending the end sem exam
The calculation of Final course Score is proposed as follows:
GAA =

Average score in Best 10 out of all 11 weekly graded assignments (Subjective and

Objective)

Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
Overall score for eligible students:
T = 0.1 GAA + max(0.6 F + 0.2 max(Qz1, Qz2) , 0.4F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2)

17. Advanced Algorithms
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Quiz 1, Quiz 2 and End Term exams - to be attended in person at designated centres.
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of best 5 out of first 7 weekly assessments
scores >= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = score in Best 10 out of all 11 graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F - score in End Term exam
T = 0.15GAA + Max((0.35F + 0.25Qz1 + 0.25Qz2), 0.5F+0.25Max(Qz1,Qz2))

​

18. Special topics in ML (Reinforcement Learning)

Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write end term exam: Average of best 5 out of first 9 weekly assessments scores
>= 40/100 and attending at least one of the 2 quizzes in the centre
Eligibility to get final course grade: Attending the End sem exam
Overall score for eligible students:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
GPA = Graded Programming Assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F - score in End Term exam
T = 0.1 GAA(autograded) + 0.2 GPA + Max ((0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2), 0.3 Max(Qz1,Qz2)) + 0.3F

19. Game Theory and Strategy
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4th, 2024

End term: Sep 1st 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centres
Eligibility to write the final exam: Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly
assignment scores >= 40/100 AND attendance in one of the 2 quizzes
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
GAA = Average score in Best 10 out of First 11 weekly graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

Annexure I

Table.1 Schedule for Elective courses

Important Dates
May 2024 CALENDAR
For Qualifier Student
Start Date
End Date
Monday, February 26,
Qualifier Registration Form
2024
Sunday, May 26, 2024
Course and Program Orientation Monday, May 20, 2024
Thursday, May 30, 2024
Qualifier Exam
Sunday, July 7, 2024
Publishing results for Qualifier
exam
Friday, July 12, 2024
QF Course Registration and
Reattempt Qualifier window
Wednesday, July 17, 2024 Thursday, July 18, 2024
Reattempt Qualifier Exam
Sunday, August 4, 2024
Publishing results
Wednesday, August 14,
Qual_Reattempt
2024
For Term Students
Course registration window
Drop Course form window
Term start
Quiz1

Start Date
Wednesday, May 15,
2024
Friday, June 21, 2024
Friday, May 31, 2024
Sunday, July 7, 2024

End Date
Thursday, May 16, 2024
Sunday, June 23, 2024

Publishing results for Quiz1
Programming Quiz1 (Day1)

Monday, July 15, 2024
Sunday, July 21, 2024

OPPE1 Result Release
Quiz2
Publishing results for Quiz2
Programming Quiz2 (Day1)
Programming Quiz2 (Day2)

Friday, July 26, 2024
Sunday, August 4, 2024
Monday, August 12, 2024
Sunday, August 18, 2024
Sunday, August 25, 2024
Thursday, August 22,
2024
Sunday, September 1,
2024
Monday, September 9,
2024

Wednesday, July 31, 2024

YTD

YTD

Start Date

End Date

Monday, May 20, 2024
Sunday, September 1,
2024
Monday, September 9,
2024
Start Date
Friday, May 31, 2024
Friday, May 31, 2024
Friday, May 31, 2024
Sep 14 - Sep17
Jan 4 - Jan 7
May 30 - Jun 2

Friday, August 2, 2024

OPPE2 Result release
END TERM (DAD_Qualifier)
Publishing results for EndTerm
Disco Student Meeting
Class Committee
For DAD Qualifier Students
DAD Qualifier Registration
Window
DAD Qualifier Exam
Publishing results for DAD
Qualifier
Last Date to Edit Exam City
Quiz1
Quiz2
End Term
Saavan'23 (online)
Margazhi'24 (online)
Paradox'24 (offline)

Tuesday, August 27, 2024

Saturday, September 14,
2024

Saturday, September 14,
2024
End Date
Friday, June 7, 2024
Friday, July 5, 2024
Friday, August 2, 2024

BS in Electronic Systems
IIT Madras
May 2024

Grading Document
Table of Contents
Introduction
May 2024 term - Important Dates
Assessments, Evaluation and Grading
Lab Handbook:
Pass criteria and Grades
Badges - for participation in Discourse forum
Foundation level courses
1. English - I
2. Math for Electronics - I
3. Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
3.1 Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab
4. Introduction to C Programming
5. English - II
6. Introduction to the Linux Shell
7. Digital Systems
8. Electrical and Electronic Circuits
9. Electronics Lab
10. Embedded C Programming
11. Math for Electronics - II
12. Signals and Systems
13. Intro to python programming
Annexure I
Term Calendar
Assignment Dates
Quizzes, OPPEs, NPPEs and Exam Dates

Introduction
This document provides detailed information about evaluation and grading of courses of BS in
Electronic Systems Degree program from IIT Madras. The information includes details of each
course such as number of credits, eligibility to write the final exam, eligibility to obtain the final
course grade, parameters considered for calculating final score and calculation of final score.
The BS in Electronic Systems Degree program comprises three levels - Foundation, Diploma
and BS Degree. The Foundation and Diploma level consists of ten courses each and BS
Degree level consists of 12 courses. The BS program has 142 credits in total with 44 credits in
Foundation, 42 credits in Diploma and 56 credits in Degree level.
Each course has multiple types of assessments - online weekly assignments, quizzes and an
end term (semester) exam. The weekly assignments are generally non-proctored whereas
quizzes and end term exams are proctored and are conducted at designated exam centres.

Students are advised to go through this grading document carefully. Students can contact the
support team for any queries related to this document.

May 2024 term - Important Dates
​

​

Quizzes in Centres:
​

Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

​

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End Term (Sem) Exam: September 1, 2024

Assessments, Evaluation and Grading
Evaluation and grading varies from course to course. Generally, most courses have the
following types of assessments: weekly assignments, proctored quizzes, an in-person end term
(sem) exam, online proctored programming exam, and lab work. However, some courses may
have special types of assessments depending on the type of the course. Please note that the
assessments, evaluation and grading varies from course to course.
Details of the types of assessments are mentioned below:
​

Online assignments:
​ A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted
online within the due date specified.
​ Generally, the average score of the best five out of the first nine weekly
assignments given during the course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible
to write the final exam and get the hall ticket for the same.
​ Score in any unattempted assignment will be counted as 0.
​ Depending on the course, the average of weekly assignment scores may
contribute to the total course score and course grade.

​

Two proctored Quizzes
​

Two quizzes will be conducted after the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the
content of Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively.

​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​

​
​

​

At the end of a semester, there will be a final exam of 1.5 hours duration for
each course. (This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and
exams for four courses completed in two sessions of 3 hours each throughout
the program.)
There will be an eligibility criteria defined for every course to obtain the hall
ticket for the final exam, announced at the beginning of the semester.
If the above eligibility is not satisfied, students will not be allowed to write the
Semester exam and will have to repeat the course.

In person Lab Sessions in IIT Madras
​

​

​

These quizzes must be attempted in person in the city chosen
There will be a single session exam with 4 hours to attempt four subjects, 3
hours to attempt three subjects and 2 hours to attempt one or two subjects.
The Qualifier score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses
registered immediately after the qualifier exam in the same semester.
The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will
be provided.
Attending one of the two quizzes will be a mandatory condition to be eligible
to appear for the final exam, unless stated otherwise.
These Quizzes are conducted in designated exam centers where students
have to physically go and attend.
Final exam at the end of the course

Some of the courses are accompanied by lab sessions to be done at home
with the use of electronic kits as suggested. The cost of the kit is not included
in the fee structure given in this document.
It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the
lab experiments specified and complete the lab exams in person at the
campus. These are planned currently in the months of May-July and
November-January and may change based on other constraints. The
tentative duration for the in person component at IIT Madras is expected to
be one week per lab course every semester.

Online Proctored Programming Exams (OPPE)
​
​

OPPEs are conducted for certain programming courses. Students can take
the exam from their home, unless mentioned otherwise.
The duration and marks of OPPE varies from course to course. Generally it is
a 1.5 or 2 hour exam.

​

Course Participation Marks
​

​

​

​

​

Course Participation Marks are for encouraging and incentivising the students
to participate more in the activities of the course. These marks will be added
ONLY for the students who pass the course and will only impact the course
grade, and not the pass criteria.
Criteria for course participation marks: Marks will be applicable based on
availability of practice/mock assignments in the course. It can vary from
course to course and can be from 0-5.
Based on practice assignments - 5 marks - applicable to only Foundation &
Diploma courses (wherever practice assignments are provided). A course
may not have participation marks.
If the average of the marks obtained in all the practice assignments (including
programming) until week 8 AND mock tests conducted before Quiz 1 & Quiz
2 >= 40/100, students will get 5 marks.
Note: If the course is not having Practice or Mock Assignments, then there
will be no Course Participation marks will be given.

Lab Handbook:
Kindly look into the lab handbook, which has been attached here Lab Handbook

Pass criteria and Grades
Grades:
Total Course Score (T) considers all assessment components in every course as defined in the
Grading document of that semester. A candidate is deemed to have passed a course if Total
Course Score (T) >= 40/100. This criteria is the same for all learners in the course. An absolute
grading system, as described in the following table, will be followed:

Condition satisfied by
‘T’ - Total Course Score (Out
Of 100)

Sta
tus

Let
ter
Gr
ad
e

Gra
de
poi
nt

(T ≥ 90)

Pas
s

S

10

(90 > T ≥ 80)

Pas
s

A

9

(80 > T ≥ 70)

Pas
s

B

8

(70 > T ≥ 60)

Pas
s

C

7

(60 > T ≥ 50)

Pas
s

D

6

(50 > T >= 40)

Pas
s

E

4

(T < 40)

Fail

U

0

Average of the Weekly
assignment score <40/100
or 0 quizzes attended - (Not
eligible to write the final exam)

Fail

W
A/
W
Q

0

To summarize, S,A,B,C,D,E - Pass grade; U- Fail grade, WA/WQ - Learner was not eligible to
attempt the end term exam
Supplementary Exam
​ If student is absent in the End Term Exam (ET) alone, a supplementary exam is
planned to be conducted at IIT Madras
​ Those who want to take supplementary exam should come to IIT Madras campus
Note: This supplementary is not finalized. Students will be communicated about the details of
the supplementary exam only if it is finalized.
I grade:
In I grade - there are three types:
​

If you are absent for ET alone with all other assessment components completed
(quizzes, OPPEs, project, lab, weekly assignments) - grade will be pushed as I.
Options: You can register to take up the ET exam alone in the subsequent term. OPPE
and quizzes will not be scheduled for you. All other marks for Final course score will be
taken from the previous run.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE but wrote the ET exam and crossed the cutoff for
T as given in the course grading policy, grade = I_OP.

You can register to do the OPPE alone whereby if the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You can attempt
the OPPE alone. All other mark components of FInal course score will be taken from the
previous run. ET and quizzes will not be scheduled for you.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE and absent for ET, then grade = I_BOTH
You can register for ET and OPPEs alone. If the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You will attempt
the ET and OPPEs. Quiz and GAA and other components will be taken from the
previous run and not scheduled.
In all the above cases, you can also choose to repeat the entire course and not just do the
ET/OPPE alone if you want to reattempt all assessment components.
Summary Table for course grading
Average of
Graded
assignment
score

Attendance
in Quizzes
(as per
course
eligibility)

ET

T

Grade

Result

Condition for course reg

< 40

Not
attended

-

-

WA

Fail

Repeat the entire course

>= 40

Attended

Present

>=40

Depends
on the
marks

Pass

>= 40

Attended

Absent

-

I

Fail

Option 1: Attend makeup exam
at IIT Madras (*YTF)
OR
Option 2: Complete ET alone
in the next term. GA and quiz
marks will be carried over
OR
Option 3: Repeat the entire
course

>= 40

Not
attended

-

-

WQ

Fail

Repeat the entire course

>= 40

Attended

Present

< 40

U

Fail

Appear for the Supplementary
exam OR
Repeat the entire course

* Make up exam and Supplementary exam are to be finalized
Summary Table for Lab and OPPE related course

1

2

Lab

OPE1/
OPE2

ET

T

Grade

Possibilities for student

Absent

Absent

Absent

-

U

Repeat the course.

I_LOP

Complete OPE and Lab in next term; Both
OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over
OR

Absent

Absent

Present >=35

Repeat the entire course
3

4

<35

Present

Absent

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term; Both
OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_LOP

Complete Lab and OPE in next term, Both
OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

-

U

Repeat the entire course

>=40

I_OP

Complete OPE alone in next term, Both
OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

<40

U

Repeat the entire course

I_BOTH

Complete ET and OPE in next term, Both
OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Present >=40

I_L

Complete Lab alone in next term
Or
Repeat the entire course

Present

U

Repeat the entire course

I_L_ET

Complete Lab and ET in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be carried
over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Present

5

6

7

Present
Absent

Present
score<
40/100
(Fail)

8

Absent

4

5

Present
Present
score<
Present
40/100
(Fail)

6

7

Absent

Absent

Present
Score >
40/100

8

9

Absent

Present
Score >
40/100

Absent

-

<40

-

9
Present

Present
Score >
40/100

10

11

Absent

-

Present

Present

Absent

Absent

-

I

Complete ET alone in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be carried
over
OR
Repeat the entire course

Actual
Grade

Grade as per the Total score T

I_OPET

Repeat OPPE and End Term Exam in next
term Both OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over
or
Repeat Entire course

Course Fee
Repeating one component [OPPE/Lab/EndTerm] then the course fee will be Rs.2000
Repeating two components [OPPE+Lab,OPPE+EndTerm,Lab+EndTerm] then the course fee will be
Rs.4000
Full course fee is applicable for Repeating the entire course

​
​
​

OPPE will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating ET
alone.
ET will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating OPPE
alone.
Students who registered for repeating OPPE & ET will have to appear for
OPPE1, OPPE2 & ET.

Registered Category

OPPE

ET alone

No OPPE will be conducted

OPPE alone

Both OPPE will be conducted

ET + OPPE

Both OPPE and ET will be
conducted

Badges - for participation in Discourse forum
We will be looking at active engagement with Discourse in a term and provide badges for
participation.
Badges will be given based on the number of hours a student spends on Discourse. A
student is expected to spend a minimum of 1 hour per week per course in Discourse reading
posts.
Student will get the following badges:
​ Read time of up to four hours per course in a term: Badge 1

​
​

Read time of up to eight hours per course in a term: Badge 2
Read time of up to twelve hours per course or more: Badge 3

(Applicable only after you get the BS student roll number)

Foundation level courses
The following are the Foundation level courses:
Semest
er

Level

Course Title

Credits

1

Foundation

English I

4

1

Foundation

Mathematics for Electronics I

4

1

Foundation

Electronic System Thinking and
Circuits

4

1

Foundation

Electronic System Thinking and
Circuits Lab

1

1

Foundation

Introduction to C Programming

2+3

2

Foundation

English II

4

2

Foundation

Introduction to the Linux Shell

5

2

Foundation

Digital Systems

4

2

Foundation

Electrical and Electronic Circuits

4

2

Foundation

Electronics Lab

3

3

Foundation

Embedded C Programming

4+2

3

Diploma

Math for Electronics II

4

3

Diploma

Signals and Systems

4+1

3

Diploma

Python programming

5

1. English - I
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Parameters for Final course Score calculation:
Final course Score calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

2. Math for Electronics - I
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100

​

AND Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

3. Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

3.1 Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab
In-campus Lab work: Students are required to visit IIT Madras for lab work.
Prerequisites: None

Credits: One

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the in-campus practical lab activity

Final course Score T calculation: 1(Attendance) * ((0.5*experiment )+(0.5 * Report))

4. Introduction to C Programming
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024
OPPE 1: July 21, 2024

Quiz 2: No Quiz-2

End term: September 1, 2024

OPPE 2: Aug 18, 2024 & Aug 25, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
For Quiz 1, OPPE 1, OPPE 2 and End Term exam dates please refer to Annexure
(OPPE 1 and OPPE 2: Students will be allocated one of the two slots on each date: YTD)
​ Eligibility for OPPE 1: OPPE 1 will be scheduled for ALL who enrolled to the
course
​ Eligibility for OPPE 2: We will be having a Timed Assignment (LAB Assignment)
(LAB Assignment) every week that is open three days in a week. Students have
to mandatorily attempt this assignment in at least one of the 3 slots
If the Average of the scores of the best 3 out of the first 5 Timed Assignment (LAB
Assignment) (LAB Assignment)s >= 40/100, then we will schedule the OPPE2 for you. If
you do not satisfy this, we will not schedule OPPE2 for you.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Five
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignments
(objective and programming) scores >= 40/100
AND
​ Attendance in one of the two OPPEs (OPPE1, OPPE2)
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade:
The conditions below should be satisfied.
​
​

Attending the end term exam AND
Score in one of the two programming exams (OPPE1, OPPE2) should be >=
40/100 - Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming quizzes

Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​
​
​
Formula:

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of all weekly graded
assignments
WTA = Average of best 4 out of the first 6 Timed Assignment (LAB
Assignment) (LAB Assignment) scores
Qz1 = score in Quiz 1 (0, if not attempted) - in center
OPPE1 = score in OPPE 1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1
OPPE2 = score in OPPE 2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2
F = score in final exam

T = 0.10GAA + 0.2Qz1 + 0.40F + max(0.15 OPPE1 + 0.15 OPPE2, 0.20
max(OPPE1,OPPE2)) + 0.15 WTA (capped to 100)
​
​
​
​

​

Maximum marks a student can get is 115 marks if both OPPEs are attended.
Else if one oppe is attended, evaluation is out of 105 marks
Proctored in person - 60 marks (Quiz+Final)
Proctored online - 30 or 20 marks (OPPE)
Non proctored timed - 15 marks (WTA - starts from week 5, with each week
having 3 or 4 programs). Score in each week will be calculated as the average of
marks obtained in all timed programming assignments given that week.
Non proctored non-timed - 10 marks (GAA)

5. English - II
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: English I
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

6. Introduction to the Linux Shell
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024
OPPE 1: July 21, 2024

Quiz 2: No Quiz-2
End term: September 1, 2024
OPPE 2: Aug 18, 2024 & Aug 25, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Labs: June 15, June 29, July 13, July 27 and August 10 2024
OPPE and NPPE Dates and Timings has been updated in Annexures
Corequisites: Introduction to C Programming

Credits: Five

Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and
programming) scores >= 40/100 and AND

​

Attending the OPPE

Eligibility to get the course grade:
​

Attending the end semester exam

​

Attending the programming exam, with a score >= 40/100

​

Attending the lab activities

​

Attendance in 3 out of 5 labs

​

Completing at least 40 % of tasks in all the labs.”Best 3 out of 5 will be
considered for grading.”

​

The deadline for the first 3 labs is 28th July 2024, and the next 2 labs is 21th
August 2024

GAA1 = Average of score in Best 9 out of all weekly graded assignments
GAA2 = Score in NPPE

Qz1[Week 1-4] = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
OPE1[Week 1-4] = Score in online remote proctored programming exam
​

One additional attempt will be provided only if score < 40 in first attempt

F = score in End Term exam
VMT = score in VM Tasks (It has to be completed in the virtual machine provided)
Virtual Machine Tasks are the 10 tasks available in the course VM shared, named from
assignment_1 to assignment_10.
Final course score:
PART_A = 0.06 GAA1 + 0.04 GAA2 + 0.2 Qz1 + 0.3 F
PART_B = 0.1 VMT + 0.5 LAB + 0.5 OPPE (capped to 100)
Final course score T = 0.6 PART_A + 0.4 PART_B

7. Digital Systems
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
Eligibility to write the final exam:

Credits: Four

​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments

​
​
​
​

Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
Lab = score based on demonstration of lab work (if applicable)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

8. Electrical and Electronic Circuits
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Math for Electronics I and Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
Lab = score based on demonstration of lab work, if applicable
F = score in final exam

T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

9. Electronics Lab
In-campus Lab work: Students are required to visit IIT Madras for lab work.
Corequisites: Electrical & Electronic Circuits and Digital Systems
Credits: Three
WE: Weekly Experiment submission
ID: In-person Demonstration during lab at IIT Madras
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade:

​
​

Minimum 40% in WE
Attend the in-person lab at IIT Madras

The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
T = 0.4 (WE) + 0.6 (ID)

10. Embedded C Programming
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Prerequisites: Introduction to C Programming Corequisites: Introduction to the Linux Shell
Credits: Six
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.2GAA + max ((0.5F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2)), (0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2))

11. Math for Electronics - II
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Math for Electronics I
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Credits: Four

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100

​

AND Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

12. Signals and Systems
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Electrical and Electronic Circuits
Eligibility to write the final exam:

Credits: Four

​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

13. Intro to python programming
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

No Quiz2 for this course.

End term: Sep 1st 2024

OPPE1: Sunday, July 21, 2024 (08:00 to 09:30 AM, 10:30 to 12:00 PM, 04:30 to 06:00 PM)
OPPE2: Sunday, August 25, 2024 (10:00 AM - 11:30 AM, 01:30 PM - 03:00 PM, 04:30 PM - 06:00 PM)
For Both OPPE1 & OPPE2, out of the 3 slots, one will be allocated from IITM. Please keep
yourself free on the dates given.
OPPE 1 will be scheduled for ALL who enrolled to the course
Eligibility to appear for the OPPE 2:
If the Average of the scores of the best 5 out of the first 6 Weekly programming assignments
(GrPA) >= 40/100
AND
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
then we will schedule the OPPE2 for you. If you do not satisfy this, we will not schedule OPPE2
for you.
Eligibility to appear for the final exam is as follows:
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Both the conditions below should be satisfied.
​ Attending the end term exam AND
​ Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming exams (OPPE1,
OPPE2) should be >= 40/100 The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
GAA1 = Average score in Best 10 objective assignments out of First 11 graded objective
assignments
GAA2 = Average score in Best 10 programming assignments out of First 11 graded
programming assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted) - in center
PE1 = score in OPPE1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1
PE2 = score in OPPE2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1 GAA1 (objective) + 0.1GAA2 (programming) + 0.1Qz1+ 0.4F+ 0.25 max(PE1, PE2) +
0.15 min(PE1, PE2) — capped to 100

Annexure I
Term Calendar
May 2024 Calendar
For Qualifier Student

Start Date

End Date

Qualifier Registration Form

Monday, Feb 26 2024

Sunday, May 26, 2024

Course and Program Orientation

Monday, May 20, 2024 Thursday, May 30, 2024

Qualifier Exam

Sunday, July 7, 2024

Publishing Result for Qualifier Exam

Friday, July 12, 2024

QF Course Registration and Reattempt
Qualifier Window

Wednesday, July 17,
2024

Reattempt Qualifier Exam

Sunday, August 4, 2024

Publishing Result Qual _ Reattempt

Wednesday, August 14,
2024

For Term Students

Start Date

End Date

Course Registration Window

Wednesday, May 15,
2024

Thursday, May 16, 2024

Drop Course form Window

Friday, June 21, 2024

Sunday, June 23, 2024

Term Start

Friday, May 31, 2024

Quiz 1

Sunday, July 7, 2024

Publishing results for Quiz 1

Monday, July 15, 2024

Programming Quiz 1 (Day 1)

Sunday, July 21, 2024

OPPE1 Result Release

Thursday, July 25, 2024 Tuesday, July 30, 2024

Quiz 2

Sunday, August 4, 2024

Publishing results for Quiz 2

Monday, August 12,
2024

Programming Quiz 2 (Day 1)

Sunday, August 18,
2024

Programming Quiz 2 (Day 2)

Sunday, August 25,
2024

Thursday, July 18, 2024

Sunday, July 21, 2024

OPPE2 Result Release

Thursday, August 22,
2024

End Term

Sunday, September 1,
2024

Publishing Result for End Term

Monday, September 9,
2024

Tuesday, August 27, 2024

Saturday, September 14,
2024

Quiz 1

Quiz 2

End term
exam

OPPE1

OPPE2
Day 1

OPPE2
Day2

7 July 2024,
Sunday

4 August
2024, Sunday

1 Sep 2024,
Sunday

July 21 2024

Aug 18 2024

Aug 25 2024

2pm-6pm*

2pm-6pm*

9am-12pm,
2pm-5pm

In centers

In centers

In centers

Online remote
proctored

Online remote
proctored

Online remote
proctored

(If required and, we will do a morning session for the quiz)

Assignment Dates
Content Release
Dates

Assignment deadlines
Foundation

Assignment deadlines
Diploma

Week 1

Friday, May 31, 2024

Wednesday, June 12, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Week 2

Friday, June 7, 2024

Wednesday, June 19, 2024

Sunday, June 16, 2024

Week 3

Friday, June 14, 2024

Wednesday, June 26, 2024

Sunday, June 23, 2024

Week 4

Friday, June 21, 2024

Wednesday, July 3, 2024

Sunday, June 30, 2024

Week 5

Friday, June 28, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

Sunday, July 14, 2024

Week 6

Friday, July 5, 2024

Wednesday, July 17, 2024

Monday, July 22, 2024

Week 7

Friday, July 12, 2024

Wednesday, July 24, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Week 8

Friday, July 19, 2024

Wednesday, July 31, 2024

Sunday, July 28, 2024

Week 9

Friday, July 26, 2024

Sunday, August 11, 2024

Sunday, August 11, 2024

Week 10

Friday, August 2, 2024 Wednesday, August 21, 2024

Tuesday, August 20, 2024

Week 11

Friday, August 9, 2024 Wednesday, August 21, 2024

Tuesday, August 20, 2024

Week 12

Friday, August 9, 2024 Wednesday, August 28, 2024

Wednesday, August 28,
2024

Quizzes, OPPEs, NPPEs and Exam Dates
​ Quizzes in Centres: July 7, 2024 and August 4, 2024: 2 pm-6 pm
(If required we might do a morning session for the quiz)
​
​
​
​
​

End Term Exam: September 1, 2024 9 am-12 noon & 2 pm-5 pm
OPPE 1: July 21st 2024
OPPE 2: August 18th & August 25th 2024
NPPE1: [Week 1-5]:July 17th 2024
NPPE2: [Week 1-7]: August 16th 2024

Note: The dates mentioned in this document might change and the same will be
communicated to students if and when there are changes
Published using Google Docs
Report abuseLearn more
BS ES - Student Handbook
Updated automatically every 5 minutes

Student Handbook

BS Degree in Electronic Systems

A four-year degree from IIT Madras

IITM BS Degree Office, 3rd Floor, ICSR Building, IIT Madras, Chennai - 600036
support-es@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in

Please read this

Dear Student,

This Student Handbook is intended to provide IIT Madras BS Electronic Systems Degree
students with the information and policies they should be aware of, which may help them
make the most of the opportunities offered in this program. It also gives you formal
notification and explanation of the program’s regulations, policies and procedures.

It is essential, and your responsibility, to read it and familiarize yourself with the content. It
should be kept handy and referred to during your time with us.

This handbook may be revised time and again. While this student handbook was prepared
on the basis of the best information available at the time of publication, all information,
including policies and procedures are subject to change without notice or obligation.

We hope that your time as a student in this program is successful and enjoyable.

Thank you.
This document was last updated on 11 Sep 2023.

Table of Contents

A) Program Overview

6

1. Highlights of the program
2. Flexibility

6

7

3. Structure of the program

7

4. Fees for the entire program
5. Admission to the program

8
9

5.1 Entry through Qualifier Exam

9

5.2 Eligibility to apply for the Qualifier Exam
5.3 Qualifier Exam Fee

10

10

5.4 Admissions through Regular entry

11

5.5 Criteria for passing the Qualifier exam
5.6 Validity of the qualifier score

12

13

5.7 Communication about qualifier exam results
5.8 Reattempting the qualifier exam

14

5.9 Use of the Qualifier score as Quiz 1 score
6. Credit Clearing Capability

15

15

7. Continuing with the program

16

8. No Direct Entry into Diploma programme
9. Courses in various levels of program
10. Learning Process

14

16
17

18

11. BS Level: Elective Courses and Apprenticeship
11.1 Elective Courses

20

11.2 Open Elective Courses

20

19

11.3 NPTEL Courses for Elective and Open Elective Courses
11.4 Apprenticeship

21

12. Learner Life Cycle

21

13. Certificates and Mark transcripts
13.1 Design of Certificates

23

BS in Electronic Systems

23

Diploma in Electronic Systems

24

Foundation in Electronic Systems
13.2 Mark transcripts

23

24

25

14. Academic aspects

26

14.1 Academic calendar

26

Course content for online delivery
14.2 Timeline & Fees

26

27

14.3. Course content for online delivery

27

14.4. Evaluation and grading of courses in every term
14.5 Pass criteria for each course
14.6 Repeating a course

29

31

Registering for Courses: Semester-2 Onwards
Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade
Repeating a Course for Improvement
Make Up Exams

34

14.7 Dropping a course

35

33

33
33

27

20

14.8 Learning paths

37

14.9 Prerequisite course requirements
Foundation courses

37

37

Diploma level courses

38

Degree level courses

39

15. Graduating with a BS degree

39

B) Software and Hardware Requirements - Mandatory System Specifications
Hardware

40

Software/Applications
Laboratory Kit

41

41

Internet Bandwidth

41

For OnlineProctored Examinations
System compatibility test
Other References

42

42

C) Houses and Clubs
D) Terms of Service
Introduction

41

43
43

43

Rules for Online Conduct

44

Strictly Prohibited Items

45

User Accounts

45

Entry Criteria

46

Your Right to use Content on the IIT Madras Study Site

46

40

Use FOR Personalization and Pedagogical Improvements
User Postings

47

Certificates / Degrees and Other Products & Services
Trademarks

46

47

49

Use of IIT MADRAS, IIT Names, Trademarks, AND Service Marks
Copyright Infringement

49

Disclaimers of Warranty / Limitations of Liabilities
Third-party Services; Links to Other Websites
Non-Liability

49

50
50

51

Indemnification

51

Additional Terms

51

E) Privacy Policy

53

Information that IIT Madras collects from you

53

Cookies and Tracking Technologies on the IIT Madras Study site
How your information is used
How your information is shared

56
57

How to manage your personal information
Storage & Security

60

Privacy Policy Updates
Contact Information

61
61

F) Discussion Forum Etiquette

62

Discussions on Course Content

62

58

55

What should not be posted on the forum
On Tone and Courtesy in Writing
Reporting a Post

G) Honor Code

63

64

Honour Code Pledge

64

64

Changing the Honour Code

65

H) Code of Conduct

65

Be respectful of others

65

Treat People Fairly

65

Refrain from Retaliation

66

Comply with Applicable Laws
General

63

63

Post Moderation Policy

Violations

62

66

66

I) Academic Malpractices
For rude behavior

66

67

Malpractices and corresponding Punishments
J) Non-Academic Malpractices

70

Misconduct and corresponding Punishments
Cyberbullying

72

ANNEXURE

73

List of accepted class 12 equivalents

67

73

70

List of exam cities

74

BS in Electronic Systems - from IIT Madras
___________________________________________________
A) Program Overview
IIT Madras has launched the BS in Electronic Systems in the month of March 2023. This is a
non-campus program where the course contents are delivered online and can be studied
from anywhere, while the monthly quizzes and final semester exams will have to be
attended in-person at designated centres.

The lab courses will be hybrid where students will have to do experiments at home based on
the process videos shared and mandatorily come in person to IIT Madras to demonstrate
the same and complete the lab course requirements. These visits will be twice a year
generally between May-July and Nov-Jan with the duration of visit being about 1-2 weeks.

Depending on the number of courses completed, learners can earn
Foundational level certificate in Electronic Systems
Diploma in Electronic Systems
BS degree in Electronic Systems
1. Highlights of the program
Courses are taught by faculty of IIT Madras/ other reputed institutes as well as experts from
the industry.
Unlike many competitive exams which work on the philosophy of elimination and selection
and admit a very limited number of learners into various programs based on their
performance relative to that of others, in this program there are specific qualifying criteria,
and a significantly large number of learners can enter.
The candidate applying for the program should have passed Class 12 (or equivalent) with
Mathematics and Physics as part of Class 12. There is no age limit to join the program.
There are no restrictions on geographical location. The in-person visits for lab courses are
mandatory and students who apply should be prepared for this travel.

2. Flexibility
There are three exit points, with students being able to exit with either the foundational
certificate or diploma or the degree. Students can choose their pace of study every
semester.

Being predominantly an online program, there is no geographical barrier to learning from this
program. However, learners only need to travel to exam centres for the quizzes and final
exams. Students should come to IIT Madras for lab sessions twice a year depending on the
courses taken during the term.

Important: It is important to note that qualified students who clear each stage will receive the
certificate corresponding to that stage alone. The sample certificates are shown in section
Certificates and Mark transcripts

So, for example, after the Qualifier, the student should be aware that he/she is being
admitted only to the Foundation level courses, and not to a degree program. The diplomas
or degrees are obtained by the student only when the requisite number of credits are
accrued by completing the courses prescribed. Admission to any level does not
automatically entitle the student to exit the program with the Diploma or the degree.
3. Structure of the program
The BS in Electronic Systems program comprises three levels:
Foundation
Diploma and
BS degree
Each level comprises a set of courses (both theory and laboratory) and each theory course
is divided into weeks. Generally a 4 credit course consists of 12 weeks, with pre-recorded
videos every week. Students must learn by watching those videos and reading any materials
provided or suggested by the course team.

Credit system:
The credits here are based on the UGC system of counting 14 hours of learner engagement
as one credit. One credit mentioned here would be equivalent to 3 credits in the current
(new) IITM Credit system.
The number of credits required to graduate with the BS is 142.

The structure of the program is as follows:
Level
Credits
Courses & labs
Foundational
44
9 courses + 1 lab
Diploma
42
8 courses + 2 labs
BS degree
56
12 courses and one Apprenticeship (optional)

Number of credits for each component in each level:

Level
Theory
Lab
Apprenticeship
NPTEL
Electives

Foundation
35
9

Diploma
30
12

BS
12

Optional - will replace credits from Electives
Optional - TBD
44

4. Fees for the entire program
Comparable to the fees of a regular 4 year degree
First year fees kept low to enable learners to try out the program
Entry fee into qualifying phase: Rs 6000/Fee/credit in each level *

Level
Fees
Fees to be paid at each level (For general category students)*

Total fees to Earn the Foundation, Diploma & BS degree
Foundation
Rs 2000 / credit
Rs 1000 / credit
Rs. 72,000
Rs. 8,000
Rs. 80,000
Diploma
Rs. 4000 / credit
Rs. 1,68,000
Rs. 2,48,000
BS
Rs. 6000 / credit
Rs. 3,36,000
Rs. 5,84,000

* General Category. For students belonging to SC/ST/PwD categories and those with family
income < 5 Lakhs per Annum (LPA), additional fee scholarships from IITM are available.

Institution fee advance:
Category of student
Institution fee advance
SC or ST or PwD with > 40% disability certificate
50%

EWS or OBC-NCL category with annual family income between 1-5 LPA
50%
SC or ST AND PwD with >40% disability certificate
75%
SC or ST or PwD with > 40% disability or EWS or OBC-NCL category AND annual family
income less than 1 LPA
75%

For candidates who are outside India and studying in the program: Facilitation fee for
exams is in addition to the above for candidates writing exams overseas - as fixed up with
the local exam partner there.
The fee will be revisited periodically and revised if necessary.

Lab work: For labs, in-person visits to IIT Madras are mandatory for lab courses. Also
students are expected to obtain access to the lab kit recommended by IIT Madras to be able
to perform experiments of lab courses at home. The details of the kit along with the costing
will be provided to the students who register.
5. Admission to the program
5.1 Entry through Qualifier Exam
To enter the Foundation level, applicants have to pass the Qualifier Exam. The Qualifier
Exam is a 4-hour exam to be attended in person.

The Foundation courses allow for interested applicants with a variety of educational
backgrounds to be trained in the basics (Maths for Electronics 1, Electronic System Thinking
and Circuits, Introduction to C Programming and English 1) required to take up the Diploma
level of Electronic Systems program.

Entry: Via the Qualifier Exam into the Foundation level
Exit 1: Foundation course certificate
Exit 2: Diploma in Electronic Systems
Exit 3: BS in Electronic Systems

Qualifier Exam:
At the end of the four weeks of content, the qualifier exam will be conducted for eligible
candidates based on the content covered in the four weeks of study. The qualifier exam is a
4-hour exam for the four subjects combined, to be attended in person at designated exam
centers.
5.2 Eligibility to apply for the Qualifier Exam
Anyone who has passed Class 12 (or equivalent) with Physics and Mathematics in class 12
can apply. Those who qualify can join the program immediately. View list of accepted class
12 equivalents.
For Class XII passed students without Maths & Physics - Students passing Maths and
Physics separately in NIOS or any equivalent are permitted to apply for the program.
School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams (with Physics and
Mathematics as their subjects of study) or completed Class 11 exams can apply. Those who
qualify can join the program only after passing Class 12.
Anyone in one of the two categories above can apply irrespective of age, any other
academic background, any role or geographical location can apply. No additional eligibility
other than the ones mentioned here are required to apply for the qualifier process or join the
foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam.
The candidate has to pay the fees for the Qualifier exam - currently set as Rs 6000/- (non
refundable) for General category with suitable waivers for candidates from the SC/ST, EWS
and PwD with 40% disability backgrounds.
Currently there is no waiver for any other group of students.
This fee is non-refundable once the last date for cancellations has passed.
5.3 Qualifier Exam Fee
Application fee
Qualifier to Foundation level
General category / EWS / OBC-NCL
Rs.6000
PwD (>= 40% disability) / SC / ST category
Rs.3000
PwD (>= 40% disability) AND SC / ST category
Rs.1500

Note:
For students opting to write Qualifier Exam in an Exam Centre outside India, an exam
facilitation Fee will apply in addition to application fee
The qualifier fee will not be refunded once the last date for cancellation has passed.
5.4 Admissions through Regular entry
All regular entry applicants must go through the Qualifier Process to earn admission to the
Foundation Level. The week 1 content is available to all candidates to sample on the
website: https://study.iitm.ac.in/es/ and view.

The candidate has to fill the application form available on the website
https://study.iitm.ac.in/es/ and pay the fees for the Qualifier exam - currently set as Rs
6000/- (non refundable) for General category with suitable waivers for candidates from the
SC/ST, EWS and PwD with 40% disability backgrounds. Currently there is no waiver for any
other group of students. This fee is non-refundable once the last date for cancellations has
passed.

Qualifier Preparation:
Once the learner registers for the qualifier exam, access to 4 weeks of content for the four
Foundation level courses - Mathematics 1, Electronic System Thinking and Circuits,
Introduction to C Programming and English 1 - will be provided when the semester starts.
The content is released week wise with an assignment for each of the four weeks in each
subject. The content will be made live with an announcement on the portal, and an alert sent
through email.
Every week an assignment must be submitted for grading in each course within the deadline
that is specified. Each assignment will be graded out of 100 and any assignment that is not
attempted will be marked as 0.

Eligibility to appear for the qualifier exam (regular entry):
In each course, the average of the best two out of the first three weekly assignment scores
will be calculated.

Only those who get the minimum required average assignment scores in all four courses (as
given below) will be allowed to appear for the Qualifier Exam and will be issued the hall
ticket.

Student Type
Minimum Average Assignment Score required in each course
General Learner
40%
SC / ST / PwD with 40% disability
30%
PwD with 40% disability & SC / ST
30%
OBC-NCL / EWS
35%

At the end of the first four weeks of the semester, the qualifier exam will be conducted for
eligible candidates based on the content covered in the four weeks of study. The qualifier
exam is a 4-hour exam for the four subjects combined, to be attended in person at
designated exam centers.

Note:
Relaxations in pass criteria indicated for various categories of learners is applicable ONLY
for the qualifier process. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades / pass criteria once
registered into the program.
5.5 Criteria for passing the Qualifier exam
In the qualifier exam comprising four subjects, the learner should obtain marks >= individual
subject cut-off as shown below. The total of all subject marks should be greater than the
total cut-off. The cutoff marks are clearly specified for the different categories of learners in
the table below.

Minimum required Qualifier Exam Score in each course
Minimum required Total Qualifier Exam Score
General Learner
40%
50%
SC/ ST/ PwD with 40% disability
30%
40%
Pwd with 40% disability and SC/ ST
30%
40%
OBC-NCL / EWS
35%
45%

The following points must be noted:
When the results are released, the qualifier exam marks will be displayed within the login on
the portal along with an email alert sent to the candidates about this.
The fees paid to attempt the Qualifier exam will not be refunded in either of the two
situations - for those who were absent for the qualifier exam and for those who did not pass
it.
5.6 Validity of the qualifier score
For students who attempt the qualifier exam while in school, doing their std XII, the qualifier
marks will be valid for four semesters to continue with the foundation level.

For example, if students attempt the qualifier in July 2023, completing their std XII in May
2024, their qualifier scores will be valid to join till the semester of January 2025.
For all others, the qualifier marks will be valid for the two semesters that come after the
qualifier exam date (the continuing semester and the next one) for the learner to register to
the Foundation level. For eg: If the candidate attempts the qualifier in July 2023, their
qualifier scores will be valid to continue with the July 2023 semester and the semester of
January 2024.
This score will be invalid after the period mentioned and the learner will have to go through
the entire qualifier process including the one month of weekly assignments and retaking the
qualifier exam, if they wish to enroll in the program.

How many courses can a student register for?

Though everyone who passes the Qualifier Exam will be allowed to register for Foundation
Level, there will be limitations on the number of courses a learner will be allowed to register
for in their first term based on the Average Qualifier Exam Score (M).

Marks M (as defined above)
Maximum number of courses that learner is permitted to register in any term
0 <= M< 50
2
50 <= M< 70
3
M >= 70
4

5.7 Communication about qualifier exam results
Those who have qualified as per the qualifier process will be intimated through email.
Students can also check the qualifier status in their login on the portal. An admission letter
will be generated and provided to each qualified candidate.

5.8 Reattempting the qualifier exam
There is NO limit on the number of attempts by any candidate for the qualification process if
they did not pass.
Once they have qualified, they will not be permitted to apply again until their score is valid.
After this they will be eligible to reapply again.

There are two attempts within any semester currently. At the end of 4 weeks and at the end
of 8 weeks, qualifier exams are being conducted.

Eligible for first qualifier exam but failed or was absent
A candidate who was eligible to write the qualifier exam but was absent or failed in the first
attempt will be eligible to re-attempt the qualifier exam in the same semester without having
to repeat the assignments.
The fee for the second attempt will be as follows:

General Category / OBC-NCL/EWS Applicant
₹2000
SC / ST Category / PwD (>= 40% disability )
₹1000
SC / ST Category Applicant who is ALSO PwD (>= 40% disability )
₹500

For candidates who have not passed the first attempt and reattempt within the same
semester, the best of the two scores in each subject of the qualifier exam will be considered
for deciding the result of the Qualifier exam.

If an applicant was not eligible to receive the hall ticket for the qualifier exam in the first
attempt:

Candidates who were not eligible to write qualifier exam can only attempt in the next
semester and have to apply as a fresh candidate, paying the full fees as per the fee norms
applicable (and additional exam facilitation fee in case of candidates outside India)
They will have to redo the four weeks of course work and weekly graded assignments and
become eligible to get the hall ticket for the qualifier exam as per the minimum marks
required in each subject as mentioned earlier.
5.9 Use of the Qualifier score as Quiz 1 score
A learner who has qualified and opts to continue with some subjects in the same semester:
the qualifier exam score will be considered as Quiz 1 score
assignment scores in the subjects registered after the qualifier exam will be used for any
calculations involving these scores
If the learners register for the subjects in the subsequent semester, the qualifier score will
not be used as Quiz 1 score. They will have to appear for Quiz 1 at the exam centre which
will be considered for the final course score calculations.

JEE based entry:
A student who has qualified to attempt JEE Advanced in the current year is deemed to have
directly qualified and can register for a maximum of four courses in the Foundation level and
start the program.
For eg: if students who have qualified to write the JEE Advanced exam in 2023 can apply to
the BS-ES program in July 2023 or Jan 2024, they will be treated as having qualified and
allowed to register for courses of Foundation level.

Such students will first register to the program paying the registration fees of Rs 6000/- with
suitable waivers for students in the category of SC/ST/PwD with >40% disability and then
once the documents are verified and their registration is approved, they will proceed to pay
the fees for courses they choose to register for.
6. Credit Clearing Capability
There is a limit on the number of courses that the learner is permitted to register in a term
and it is calculated as shown below.

Term 1: decided by qualifier marks
Term 2: decided by average of marks of all courses taken in Term 1 in which the learner has
passed
Term n (n>2): M = average marks of courses passed in the previous two terms Term n-1 and
Term n-2 (This will be calculated using marks of subjects in which the candidate has

passed, not those which he/she has not passed or is not completed yet); (n-1 and n-2 terms
must be terms where the learner status is Active - defined in section Learner Life Cycle
Marks M (as defined above)
Maximum number of courses that learner is permitted to register in any term
0 <= M< 50
2
50 <= M< 70
3
M >= 70
4

The credit clearing capability CCC will be decided as follows:
If a learner has passed at least one course in term n-1, then the CCC of term n will be
calculated based on the marks as given in the above table.
If a learner has failed all courses the learner has appeared for in term n-1, CCC of next term
n will be 2.
If a learner is absent for the final exam of all courses, thus not completing their courses and
not getting grades, CCC of next term = CCC of the learner’s last term
CCC is kept as 4 by default for everyone in the Diploma level.
7. Continuing with the program
Learners who are continuing with the program will go through the following steps to sign up
for the courses:
Within the registration window, learners will select the courses they want to take in the
coming semesters with the maximum being four theory courses.
Learners go through the steps of picking two cities among the choices provided for their
quizzes and exams for that term.
They have the freedom to choose a different set of cities than the ones they opted for in the
previous semesters.
Also they can choose a different set of cities for every quiz/final exam while registering for
the courses so that accordingly booking may be done with the Exam vendor for slots in
these cities.

Learners pay only for the number of credits they are signing up for. Registration will be
approved only if the documents are verified. Only after registration, students can proceed to
pay the fees for courses they choose to register for.
Learners can register to courses for which the prerequisite is completed. e.g. in order to sign
up for Math-2, the learner must have cleared Math-1
8. No Direct Entry into Diploma programme
Students cannot register for Diploma directly. All students who wish to join for the program
must start from Foundation level only.
View Admission to the program section to know how to join the program at the Foundation
level.
9. Courses in various levels of program
The courses in each level is given below:

No.
Sem
Level
Course Title
Credits
1.1
1
Foundation
English I
4
1.2
1
Foundation
Mathematics I

4
1.3
1
Foundation
Electronic System Thinking and Circuits
4
1.3.1
1
Foundation
Electronic System Thinking and Circuits Lab
1
1.4
1
Foundation
Introduction to C Programming
2+3
2.1
2
Foundation
English II
4
2.2

2
Foundation
Introduction to the Linux Shell
5
2.3
2
Foundation
Digital Systems
4
2.4
2
Foundation
Electrical and Electronic Circuits
4
2.5
2
Foundation
Electronics Lab
3
3.1
3
Foundation

Embedded C Programming
4+2
3.2
3
Diploma
Mathematics for Electronics II
4
3.3
3
Diploma
Signals and Systems
4+1
4.1
4
Diploma
Analog Electronic Systems
4
4.2
4
Diploma
Analog Electronics Lab
3

4.3
4
Diploma
Python Programming
5
4.4
4
Diploma
Digital Systems Design
4+2
5.1
5
Diploma
Digital Signal Processing
4+1
5.2
5
Diploma
Embedded Linux on System on Programmable Chips
2+2
5.3
5

Diploma
Sensors and Applications
3
5.4
5
Diploma
Sensors Lab
3
5.5
5
Degree
Elective 1
4
6.1
6
Degree
Electronic Product Design
4
6.2
6
Degree
Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines

4
6.3
6
Degree
Control Engineering
4
6.4
6
Degree
Elective II
4
6.5
6
Degree
Elective III
4
7.1
7
Degree
Elective IV
4
7.2

7
Degree
Open Elective
4
7.3
7
Degree
Open Elective
4
7.4
7
Degree
Open Elective
4
7.5
7
Degree
Open Elective
4
8.1
8
Degree

Apprenticeship (optional)/Electives
8
8.2
8
Degree
Humanities Elective
4

Registration for Diploma courses:
Only those students who complete courses 1.1-2.5 will be permitted to proceed with
registration of courses 3.2 and higher. Students who complete 1.1-3.1 will be issued the
Foundational level certificate.

Registration for BS degree courses:
Only those students who complete courses 1.1-4.4 will be permitted to register for courses
5.5 and higher. Students who complete 1.1-5.4 will be issued the provisional Diploma in
Electronic Systems if they choose to continue with the program.

10. Learning Process
The content that is released in every course includes the following:
Videos by faculty
Activity questions - based on every video
Practice assignment - questions, pdf solution and video solution
Graded assignment - questions, solution after due date
Text transcripts and notes
Reference books
Mock test before the qualifier exam
Discussion forum and live sessions - to aid the learning

Apart from Assignments, the following assessment components will be available for each
course:
Quiz 1
Quiz 2
End Term Exam
In addition to the above, some courses will also have the following as part of the
assessment:
In-person lab work
Mock
End Term Exam
The following is the learning process for students joining the program:

Each course has weekly content which comprise video lectures. Students must go through
those videos and any other course materials and learn from them.
Course content may also have Activity questions. Answering these questions is not
compulsory, but highly recommended. These activity questions are based on each video.
Courses will also have practice assignments. These are also ungraded, but highly
recommended to students, as these practice assignments will help them to check their
understanding of the concepts taught.
Each course will have assignments every week which are graded. The number of questions
in the assignment varies from course to course. These assignments have to be submitted
online. Students must submit their assignments before the deadline
Students can read the transcripts provided for each video.
There will be a live session for every course. Students can get their doubts clarified through
these live sessions.
Students will be provided with a discussion forum where they can ask questions and post
comments. It is highly recommended that students make use of this facility to clear their
doubts
11. BS Level: Elective Courses and Apprenticeship
Learners have to complete 56 credits at the degree level for obtaining the BS degree in
Electronic Systems. It comprises core courses, department electives, open electives,
apprenticeship and humanities elective.

BS Degree level: Core and Electives and Apprenticeship

1
Core (Mandatory)

Three courses:
Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines
Electronic Product Design
Control Engineering
12
2
Elective Courses:
Four courses - Max 16 credits - List of courses will be made available in due course of time.

There will be provision for transfer from NPTEL with a certain number of credits as
maximum credits that can be transferred
16
3
Open Electives
Four courses - Max 16 credits - List of courses will be made available in due course of time.

There will be provision for transfer from NPTEL with a certain number of credits as
maximum credits that can be transferred
16
4
Humanities Elective
4
5
Apprenticeship
8

11.1 Elective Courses
The elective courses, each of 4 credits, will be offered as part of the BS degree program at
the BS degree level as department core/electives. List of courses will be made available in
due course of time.

Note: The list of courses will be subject to periodic revision.

11.2 Open Elective Courses
The courses, each of 4 credits, will be offered as part of the BS degree program at the BS
degree level as open electives. List of courses will be made available in due course of time.

Note: The list of courses will be subject to periodic revision.

11.3 NPTEL Courses for Elective and Open Elective Courses
The NPTEL courses can be credited towards elective courses and open elective courses.
Any course can be credited only once in this program. Also, the same NPTEL course cannot
be credited twice - for another academic program, say within your college and this BS
program. It should be credited only in one degree program. The provision for transfer from
NPTEL will be for a certain number of credits as maximum credits that can be transferred
List of courses, the process to be followed, the fees and other details will be made available
in due course of time.

Note: The list of courses will be subject to periodic revision.

11.4 Apprenticeship
The program provides the students in the BS level of the program to pursue an
apprenticeship with companies and research projects and earn up to eight credits in this
level. Doing an apprenticeship is optional.
The steps involved in apprenticeship, the duration, the number of courses that can be taken,
the academic credits and the cost of apprenticeship per credit will be communicated in due
course of time.
12. Learner Life Cycle
Once a learner clears the qualifier, he/she will be eligible to register for the Foundation level.
Using their personal email id, they register to the courses and make the payment. After

approval of the uploaded documents, the learner is given a roll_number@es.study.iitm.ac.in
email id.

Post that all interactions on the portal right from login to accessing the learner dashboard
and courses will be via this email id.

There will be five statuses for any learner in the program : On the rolls/Active, On Academic
Probation, Struck off the rolls, Alumnus, Quit the program.

On the rolls / Active - When a learner is registered in any semester for one or more courses
after paying the course fees, the status will be “On the rolls” or Active.
On academic probation/ Not registering to any course in a semester:
After joining the program, a learner may skip up to two semesters consecutively without
taking any courses. In the two semesters where the learner does not register for any course,
the learner status will be marked as “On Academic Probation”. The learner email ID will still
be kept alive while the learner is on academic probation.
The student can actively inform the program office about not registering to courses by
paying the “Registration keep alive fee (RKA)” of Rs 1000/- per semester. In case of
registering for courses in the next semester, the learners have to only pay the course fees.
The learner may not pay the RKA and have it as pending to be paid. Pending RKA will
include 10% extra over regular RKA when re-registering back.
To register to courses in the next semester if not paid the RKA: The learner will have to pay
the pending dues = (which will be Rs 1100/- or Rs 2200/- (Rs 1000 RKA +10% as penalty for
each semester where no courses are registered). The learner has to select the courses and
pay the course fees. Once they do this, the learner status is changed to "On the rolls".
Struck off the rolls: If a learner with status “On Academic Probation” for two consecutive
semesters does not register for courses for the third consecutive semester, the learner’s
status is changed to "Struck off the rolls". The official email id is suspended.
Readmission after striking off the roles:
Once struck off the rolls, to reactivate the registration, they will have to apply through a
separate process as defined:
If the RKA for the previous three semesters has already been paid, they have to request for
reactivating the Email ID on payment of Re-admission fee of Rs. 10000. Once done, they
can register for the courses in the upcoming term.
If the RKA for the previous three semesters has not been paid, the learner has to apply to
activate his / her account by paying the pending dues which will be Rs. 13,300= Rs.10000
(Readmission fee) + Rs 3300/- (Rs 1000 RKA x 3 semesters + Rs 300 (10% as penalty)).
On receipt of the payment, the official Email ID is activated again and they are permitted to
register using this ID. Once they do this, the status is changed to "On the rolls".

Any learner who is struck off the rolls two times, is removed from the program.

Quitting the program:
There will also be an option inside the candidate dashboard which says "I quit the program".
Once the learner applies for this midway through a level, we suspend the official email
account and activate the personal email account to access the dashboard.
Readmission after Quitting the program
If they want to recontinue, they pay the Readmission fee of Rs.10000/- get their email id
reactivated and can register to next term using this. Status will be changed to “Quit the
program”.
Alumnus: Learners who complete the entire program (BS) will be awarded the “Alumnus”
status. Once they graduate, their official Email ID will be suspended and their personal email
account will be given access to the dashboard.
Someone completing a level and quitting the program will have status as “Foundation level
certified” and “ES Diploma certified”. But will not be awarded “Alumnus” status.

Note: The amounts mentioned are tentative and awaiting approval from IITM’s authorities.
13. Certificates and Mark transcripts
13.1 Design of Certificates
The design has been finalized for the three levels of certificates, as shown on the website.
BS in Electronic Systems

Diploma in Electronic Systems

Foundation in Electronic Systems

13.2 Mark transcripts
There will be two types of mark cards that will be made available.

Semester wise Progress card
This document will list all the courses taken by the learner semester wise.
The values for every course will be course code, course name, level, grade obtained.
Note that the transcript will show all attempts and grades obtained in each of the attempts.

Grade Card
This will have the courses at each level listed only once. The best score obtained among all
attempts for each course is what will be shown here.

GPA will be calculated for the courses in a particular semester of the program.
GPA=(GPi*Ci)/Ci
Where GP = grade point of a course and Ci is the number of credits assigned to that course
and Ci is the total number of credits of all courses in the semester, including those with U or
W or I grades.

The CGPA will also be computed for all unique courses completed until this point in time
with the best grade being considered in case a course is attempted multiple times.

Procedure to apply for official Transcript & Bonafide Certificate:

Students who are interested in applying for a transcript / bonafide certificate should follow
these steps. Note that these certificates will be issued every Thursday. Students have to
plan suitably and contact us.

Send an email to support-es@study.iitm.ac.in obtain a Google form link
We will accept the Google form responses received till 12.00 PM IST every Thursday for
that week and will issue the certificate.
Responses received after 12:00 PM IST will be processed only on next Thursday, the
following week.
14. Academic aspects
14.1 Academic calendar
There will be two semesters every year. They will start in January and September
respectively.
All courses that are introduced in a semester will be offered in every subsequent semester.

Course content for online delivery
The recorded content which is released every week will be for a total of about 2-4 hours,
split into multiple lectures which includes the theory and tutorial videos.
All videos are copyrighted to IIT Madras but will be available on YouTube as a public playlist
for anyone to access and view.
All courses of 4 credits will be of duration 12 weeks.
Self test assessments for every video lecture, a practice assignment for the week with
solutions will also be released apart from text transcripts and any related notes.
The weekly graded assignment will also be released along with the above content.

14.2 Timeline & Fees

Application fee
Foundation
Diploma
BS
Regular entry
Rs 6000/Rs 80,000/Rs 1,68,000/-

Rs 3,36,000 /-

Total

Rs 80,000/Rs. 2,48,000/Rs. 5,84,000/Approx Time duration

18 months
12 months
24 months
Time (max)

36 months*
36 months
36 months

Payment per term depends on the courses one registers for in that semester.
Check sections 13.7 Dropping a course for rules on dropping a course after registration and
repeating a course.
* Note:

Each level must be completed within 36 months (3 years / 6 semesters)
The entire programme must be completed within 96 months (8 years / 16 semesters)
14.3. Course content for online delivery

The recorded content which is released every week will be for a total of about 2-4 hours,
split into multiple lectures which includes the theory and tutorial videos.
All videos are copyrighted to IIT Madras but will be available on YouTube as a public playlist
for anyone to access and view.
All courses of 4 credits will be of duration 12 weeks.
Self test assessments for every video lecture, a practice assignment for the week with
solutions will also be released apart from text transcripts and any related notes.
The weekly graded assignment will also be released along with the above content.
14.4. Evaluation and grading of courses in every term
Each course has multiple types of assessments - online weekly assignments, monthly
proctored quizzes and an end semester exam (in-person).

Online assignments:
A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted online within
the due date specified.
The average score of the best five out of the first nine weekly assignments given during the
course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible to write the final exam and get the hall ticket
for the same.
Score in any unattempted assignment will be counted as 0.
Depending on the course, the average of weekly assignment scores may also contribute to
the total course score and course grade.
Two proctored Quizzes
Two quizzes will be conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the content of Weeks
1-4 and 1-8 respectively.
These quizzes must be attempted in person in the city chosen
Will be a single session exam with 4 hrs to attempt four subjects, 3 hours to attempt three
subjects and 2 hours to attempt one or two subjects.
The Qualifier score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses registered in the
Foundation level, continuing in the same semester as the qualifier exam.
The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will be provided.
Attending one of the 2 quizzes will be a mandatory condition to be eligible to appear for the
final exam, unless stated otherwise.
Final exam at the end of the course
At the end of a semester, there will be a final exam of 1.5 hours duration for each course.
(This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and exams for four courses
completed in two sessions of 3 hours each throughout the program.)
There will be an eligibility criteria defined for every course to obtain the hall ticket for the final
exam, announced at the beginning of the semester.

If the above eligibility is not satisfied, students will not be allowed to write the Semester
exam and will have to repeat the course.
Lab Sessions
Some of the courses are accompanied by lab sessions
It is mandatory for students taking hardware lab courses to visit IIT Madras for guided lab
work during summer and winter
Option to choose slots for 1-2 weeks will be provided
14.5 Pass criteria for each course
Total Course Score (T) will be the sum of all assessment components in every course as
defined in the Grading document of that semester.

A candidate is deemed to have passed a course if Total Course Score (T) >= 40/100
This criteria is the same for all learners in the course.

An absolute grading system, as described in the following table, will be followed:

Condition satisfied by
‘T’ - Total Course Score (Out Of 100)
Status
Letter Grade
Grade point
(T ≥ 90)
Pass
S
10
(90 > T ≥ 80)
Pass

A
9
(80 > T ≥ 70)
Pass
B
8
(70 > T ≥ 60)
Pass
C
7
(60 > T ≥ 50)
Pass
D
6
(50 > T >= 40)
Pass
E
4
(T < 40)
Fail
U
0

Weekly average assignment score <40/100
or 0 quizzes attended - (Not eligible to write the final exam)
Fail
WA/WQ
0

ET - End semester exam
GA - Average of weekly Graded assignment scores
OPPE - Online proctored programming exams

Summary Table for course grading in case of absent/ failed

Average of the Weekly Graded assignment score
Attendance in Quizzes (as per course eligibility)
ET
T
Grade
Condition for course reg
< 40
Not attended
-

WA
Repeat the entire course
>= 40
Attended
Present
>=40
Depends on the marks

>= 40
Attended
Absent
I
Option 1: Complete ET alone in the next term. GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR
Option 2: Repeat the entire course
>= 40
Not attended
WQ
Repeat the entire course

>= 40
Attended
Present
< 40
U
Repeat the entire course

Summary Table for ‘I’ Grade

Condition satisfied by
‘T’ - Total Course Score (Out Of 100)
Status
Letter Grade
Grade point
Absent in ET alone

Option 1: Complete ET alone in next term;
OPPE will NOT be scheduled.
GA, quiz and OPPE marks will be carried over
OR
Option 2: Repeat the entire course
Incomplete

I

Absent in both ET & OPPE

Option 1: Complete ET and OPE in next term, Both OPPEs will be scheduled.
GA and quiz marks will be carried over
OR
Option 2: Repeat the entire course
Incomplete

I_BOTH
Absent / Fail in OPPE

Option1: Complete OPE alone in next term, Both OPPEs will be scheduled. GA, quiz and ET
marks will be carried over
OR
Option 2: Repeat the entire course
Incomplete
I_OP
-

14.6 Repeating a course
For improvement
A learner can repeat a course for improvement in grades any number of times. The fee for
repeating the course for improvement will be twice the regular course fee and the learner will
have to submit all the weekly assignments, appear for the quizzes and final exams. The
highest score amongst all attempts for a course will be used for calculating the CGPA.

Note: It is recommended that learners try and progress with new courses instead of
repeating courses for improvement, unless a learner deems it absolutely necessary or
needs to improve their learning of a course. All course material of completed courses are
available to the learner throughout the course.

If learner was not eligible to attempt the semester exam (grade=WA/WQ) or if the learner did
not attend the Quiz (Grade = U)
If average assignment score < 40/100 (WA) or no quiz attended, then the learner has to
repeat the entire course. This includes submission of assignments and redoing all the
subsequent quizzes and the semester exam. Fees for repeating the course is the same as
the course fees.
If the learner was absent for the final exam alone (grade = I): The learner has two options:
Reappear for the final term exam alone - Makeup exam: They can attend only the end term
exam whenever it is conducted in the subsequent term.
The fee to repeat an end term exam will be Rs.4000 for each course of the foundational
level and Rs.8000 for each course of the diploma / degree levels.
A learner can appear for the makeup exam only once. The score from this exam will be used
to calculate Total score T and the student will get the grade corresponding to this score.
OPTION 1:
The makeup exam may be conducted at only IIT Madras campus on the date mentioned in
the academic calendar. This will be within 4 weeks of the end-semester exam so that you
can complete this before the registration to courses for the next semester.
For students who appear for the makeup exam, if the Total score T calculated using this
end-sem score <40, the student will get a U grade and has to repeat the entire course in
subsequent semesters, paying the course fees prescribed.
If the student is absent for this makeup exam, they can choose option 2.
OPTION 2:
If a student who was absent for the final exam cannot come to IITM campus to take the
makeup exam or is absent for the makeup exam at IITM campus, they can register for the
makeup exam again along with the end semester exams for courses in the next semester.
The total number of exams that a student can register for is 4 in a semester (includes
new/repeat/improvement courses and makeup exams).
The marks for other assessment components will be carried over from the course offering
they registered for. The grading pattern used will also be as defined for the corresponding
offering.
If the student is absent for this again, they have to repeat the entire course in subsequent
semesters, paying the course fees prescribed.

If a student who has been absent for the final exam does not register for the first or second
makeup exam, they will have to repeat the entire course.

Repeat the entire course:
Students can choose not to take up the makeup exams but repeat the entire
course too.
The fee to repeat the course will be the same as the regular course fees.
The learner must complete all assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end term exam.
Marks will not be carried forward from any of the assessment components of the previous
run.
Registering for the courses will be counted as one of the courses permitted as CCC of the
learner
If the learner does not pass the course (Grade = U): If the students was eligible to write the
final exam, appeared for it and still got a U grade, the learner has two options:
OPTION 1: Appear for the Supplementary exam:
Supplementary exams will be given only for the end-semester exam and not for the quizzes
or any other assessments.
The fee to appear for this supplementary exam will be Rs.4000 for each course of the
foundational level and Rs. 8000 for each course of the diploma / degree levels. Students
have to register by paying this fee for every subject they wish to register for.
The supplementary exam may be conducted only at IIT Madras campus on the date
mentioned in the academic calendar.
A learner can appear for the supplementary exam only once. The score from this exam will
be used to calculate Total score T and the student will get the grade corresponding to this
score.
If the student is absent for this supplementary exam or Total score T calculated using this
end-sem score <40, the student has to repeat the entire course in subsequent semesters,
paying the course fees prescribed.
OPTION 2: Repeat the entire course:
Students can choose to not register and attempt the supplementary exam but repeat the
entire course.
The fee to repeat the course will be the same as the regular course fees.
The learner must complete all assignments, invigilated quizzes and the end term exam.
Note:

Learners repeating a course for any reason must do so within the time and term limits:

Each level must be completed within 36 months (3 years / 6 semesters)
The entire program must be completed within 96 months (8 years / 16 semesters).

Registering for Courses: Semester-2 Onwards
Maximum number of final exams (full course+makeup exams) <= 4
Maximum number of new + repeat full course (if failed/absent if reqd/improvement) <= CCC
Registering for new courses is subject to fulfillment of all rules and prerequisites.
If passed all/some courses then CCC is calculated on the average of passed courses.
If failed in all courses, then CCC is set to 2.
If absent for all courses then CCC of the previous term is carried forward.
Make up exam will be permitted as an option only once in the subsequent term.
Repeating a Course - WA, WQ, U or I grade
Applicable for courses with WA, WQ, U or I grade.
You can choose to repeat courses in a single term or across multiple terms. You can also
register for new courses in the term. The total number of courses must be within the CCC
limit. Learners with an Incomplete (I) grade in a course can take a Make Up Exam instead of
repeating the course.
Repeating a Course for Improvement
Applicable for courses with S, A, B, C, D or E grade.
You can choose to repeat courses to improve the grade in the course. The highest grade will
be recorded in the transcript. The total number of courses must be within the CCC limit.
Course fee Repeat for Improvement courses will be double the normal fee. Improvement
courses can be registered at any level. Eg: Foundation course improvement can be
registered at diploma level.
Note: It is recommended that learners try and progress with new courses instead of
repeating courses for improvement, unless a learner deems it absolutely necessary or
needs to improve their learning of a course. All course material of completed courses are
available to the learner throughout the course.
Make Up Exams
Applicable for courses with I grade.
You can choose to take a Makeup Exam for a course with Incomplete (I) grade. Learners will
only be required to reappear for the Final Exam for that course. The Makeup Exam does not
count towards CCC, but a student can appear for a maximum of FOUR final exams in a
term. If you have already registered for 4 courses, you do not have any more final exam
slots available.

Note: The grading pattern for make-up exams will be as follows: the pattern used will be as
per the formula used in the term the course work was done and not as per the term the
makeup exam was taken.

Quick Reckoner Table

COURSE PASS STATUS
New Course Allowed?
Repeat Course?
Take the Make Up Exam?

Passed all
Yes

Not recommended but available

Failed any/all
Yes
Yes

Absent for all final exams
Yes

Yes
Passed + Absent
Yes

Yes
Failed + Absent
Yes
Yes
Yes

Repeating OPPE:

OPE1/OPE2
ET
T
Grade
Condition for OPPE/course reg
Absent

Absent
U
Repeat the entire course
Absent
Present
>=35
I
Complete OPE alone in next term, GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course
<35
U
Repeat the entire course
Present
score< x/100
Present
>=40
I
Complete OPE alone in next term, GA, quiz and ET marks will be carried over OR
Repeat the entire course
<40
U

Repeat the entire course
Absent
I
Repeat OPPE and ET OR Repeat Entire course
Present
score> x/100
Present
>=40
Actual grade
PASS (depending on course criteria)
<40
U
Repeat entire course
Absent
I
Repeat ET alone OR Repeat Entire course

OPPE will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating ET alone.
ET will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating OPPE alone.
Students who registered for repeating OPPE & ET will have to appear for OPPE1, OPPE2 &
ET.
Registered Category

OPPE
ET alone
No OPPE will be conducted
OPPE alone
Both OPPE will be conducted
ET + OPPE
Both OPPE will be conducted

14.7 Dropping a course
(This is not applicable for the students who are continuing after qualifier in the same term)

Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed.
Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start date and not beyond.
Rs.4000 will be deducted if a Foundation level course is dropped and Rs.8000 will be
deducted if a Diploma/Degree level course is dropped.
If the learner decides to drop out of the program completely using the “I quit the program”
option, the course fee paid minus the deduction will be refunded to the learner and the
learner will be removed from the program, canceling his official email id access. The status
will also be changed to “Quit the program”.
If the learner drops one/a few of the courses registered to in a term, the refund will be made
as given in the table below but the email id will be kept active so that he/she can continue
with other ongoing courses and the program. Status will be “Active”.
If the learner opts to drop all courses registered in a term, the refund will be done as per the
table given below and the email id will be kept active so that the learner can come in and
register in the next term. But this will be counted as a term with 0 courses. Status will be
changed to “Academic probation”.
The fee receipt will be generated post these 4 weeks after term start when drop is permitted
so that all the courses and fees are tallied and confirmed.
Learners writing exams outside India would have paid Exam facilitation Fee while registering
for the courses. For such learners: If they drop from all courses in a term, 100% of the
facilitation fee for Quiz 1 will be retained while 50% of the facilitation fee for quizzes 2 and
final exam will be refunded.

Level
Paid
Retained by IITM as Admin charges
Refund
Foundation
12000
4000
8000

10000
4000
6000

8000
4000
4000

6000
4000
2000

4000
4000
0

Diploma
24000
8000
16000

20000
8000
12000

16000
8000
8000

12000
8000
4000
Degree
24000
8000
16000

Please note, The amount to be refunded will be added to your student wallet and NOT
refunded to the bank account. This amount can be used when you register for courses in the
next term and deducted from the fees to be paid then.
14.8 Learning paths
Here are some suggested learning paths

Foundation course certificate
Diploma in Electronic Systems
BS Degree in Electronic Systems

Sem
Foundation
Diploma
Year 1

Sem 1
4

Sem 2
4+1 lab course

Year 2

Sem 3
1
2
Sem 4

3+1 lab course
Year 3

Sem 5

3+1 lab course
Sem 6

Note: The learning path for the BS degree level will be mentioned in the due course of time.
14.9 Prerequisite course requirements
Foundation courses
Course name
Prerequisites
Corequisites
English I
-

Math for Electronics I
-

Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits (ESTC)
-

Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab

ESTC
Introduction to C Programming
-

English II
English I

Introduction to the Linux Shell

Introduction to C Programming
Digital Systems
Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits

Electrical and Electronic Circuits
1) Math for Electronics I and
2) Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits

Electronics Lab

Electrical and Electronic Circuits

Digital Systems
Embedded C Programming
Introduction to the Linux Shell
Lab

The first nine Foundation courses should be completed before the candidate can register for
the Diploma level course.
Students when register for Diploma level courses for the first time, the 10th foundation level
course should be included in the same term
Diploma level courses

Course name
Prerequisites
Corequisites
Math for Electronics II
Math for Electronics I

Signals and Systems
Electrical and Electronic Circuits

Analog Electronic Systems
Signals and Systems
Math for Electronics II
Analog Electronics Lab

Analog Electronic Systems
Python programming

Digital System Design
Digital Systems
Lab
Digital Signal Processing
Signals and Systems
Lab
Embedded Linux on System on Programmable Chips

1. Embedded C Programming
2. Digital System Design

Sensors and Applications
Analog Electronic Systems

Sensors Lab

Sensors and Applications

Without completing all the 10 Foundation courses and the first six Diploma level courses,
one cannot proceed to register for Year 3 Degree level courses.
That is, only those students who complete courses 1.1-4.4 will be permitted to register for
courses 5.5 and higher. Students who complete 1.1-5.4 will be issued the provisional
Diploma in Electronic Systems if they choose to continue with the program.

Degree level courses
Course name
Prerequisites
Corequisites
Elective I

Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines
Math for Electronics II

Electronic Product Design

1. Sensors and Applications;
2. Electromagnetic Fields and Transmission Lines

Control Engineering
Signals and Systems

Elective II

Elective III

Elective IV

Open Elective

Open Elective

Open Elective

Open Elective

Apprenticeship

Humanities elective

15. Graduating with a BS degree
The total number of credits to be earned in the BS level is 56. The BS level comprises 12
courses and one optional Apprenticeship. Students should earn a total of 142 credits
through all levels to get the BS Degree.
The courses are split as follows:

Type of course

Number of credits
Core courses
Three courses with four credits each

3x4 = 12 credits
Apprenticeship
(optional)

8 credits
Electives, Open Elective and Humanities Elective
Nine courses with four credits each.
9x4 = 36 credits

Only those students who complete courses 1.1-4.4 will be permitted to register for courses
5.5 and higher.

B) Software and Hardware Requirements - Mandatory System Specifications

The following are the essential requirements that are recommended to pursue the BS
Degree program from IIT Madras[1]. Please note that there will be updates in some of the
specifications with changes happening in technology.
Hardware
To enroll and study in the program, every student is required to have a laptop or desktop
with the minimum configuration being as follows:
RAM Size - 8 GB or higher (The ability to install more memory is desirable).
Processor - Intel 8th Generation or AMD 4th Generation or upwards or its equivalent (The
latest processor configuration is always recommended)
Storage - Minimum of 500 GB, Desirable of 1 TB. Having an SSD storage is desirable.
Screen size and resolution - Minimum of 13” for laptop and Minimum of 15” for desktop with
1080p
Webcamera, a mic and speaker or an earphone/headphone with mic.
Software/Applications
Operating System - Minimum requirement of Windows 10 or Ubuntu LTS Version 20.04 (or
any equivalent) or Mac OS Mojave. Having the capability of dual boot is desirable. If there is
no capability for dual boot, then the operating system must support virtualization software
like VirtualBox using which Ubuntu 20.04 can be emulated. The System Commands course
in Semester 4 will be taught primarily on Ubuntu 20.04.
Browser - Latest version of Chrome with Google Account signed in
Basic familiarity with Google Suite of tools (Docs, Sheets and Slides), specifically
collaboration features.
Any other software that is specified within the course
Laboratory Kit
A laboratory kit is required to perform experiments as part of the lab courses
In-campus Lab work: Students are required to visit IIT Madras for lab work.
This kit has to be purchased separately from IIT Madras.
The cost for it will be finalized and announced to the students. The cost of this kit is not
covered as part of the course fees prescribed.
The Electronic kit will be a learning tool that will be used over the course of several terms,
especially in the hardware related courses that have a lab component e.g. Digital systems,
Electrical and Electronic Circuits etc. It can be used to measure and source currents and
voltages to functionally test the circuits that you will build in the lab courses. It is a USB
powered instrument that can be used as a function generator and oscilloscope. We expect
that it will support Windows and Linux environments.
Internet Bandwidth
Minimum of 2 MBPS connection is required to attend sessions without disruptions. However
we strongly recommend broadband connections with much higher bandwidth for the best
learning experience.
For OnlineProctored Examinations
Browser - Latest version of Chrome is desirable

Mobile with a front camera and good internet connection (at least 4G)
Mic and speaker to be able to speak to and listen to the person at the other end
Any applications as required to be installed for the interactions/examinations
System compatibility test
All students have to mandatorily attend the system compatibility test and ensure that the
system you have conforms to the above requirements and student has to participate in this
on the dates mentioned by the Admin team to get this completed.
Other References
Some more helpful links that will help you in understanding possible system configurations:
https://towardsdatascience.com/20-necessary-requirements-of-a-perfect-laptop-for-data-scie
nce-and-machine-learning-tasks-7d0c59c3cb63
https://www.practicaldatascience.org/html/buying_datascience_computer.html
https://www.umass.edu/it/support/hardware/recommended-minimum-computer-configuration
s-windows
https://www.du.edu/it/support/how-to/students/laptops
https://wmich.edu/cs/laptop-requirements

C) Houses and Clubs
To enhance student life, the program office facilitates houses and clubs managed by
students of the program. All students in the program will be divided into 12 Houses named
after the forests in India. Each house accommodates nearly various groups of around 20
students each where the group members are from the same city or neighboring cities and
house members are from across the country.

Based on exam city preference given, students opting for the same city will be divided into
groups. If a city has fewer candidates, it will be clubbed with the next nearby city in the same
state.

Leaders, Mentors & Elections: In a House, Groups elect their Group Leaders and the Group
Leaders in turn elect their Secretary, Deputy Secretary and Web Admin among themselves.
It is the responsibility of the Mentors, who are above 25 years of age and who are identified
by the House Council, to conduct free & fair elections. They also guide the elected members
of the House Council.

Upper House Council: Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries of all 12 houses constitute the
Upper House Council that governs all houses. The Mentoring Committee, made up of one

mentor from each house, along with the UHC and BS Degree team work together in defining
policy for house guidelines.

The houses and groups will adhere to the rules, regulations, guidelines decided by the
program office. A separate communication mode will be used for Houses and clubs.
Members from the BS Degree team will be a part of all groups and communities.

D) Terms of Service
Introduction
Welcome to IIT Madras (IITM) BS Degree Program.
Please read these Terms of Service ("TOS") and Honor Code prior to registering for an
account on study.iitm.ac.in or using any portion of the IIT Madras online degree website or
study site or mobile applications (collectively, the "IIT Madras Study Site" which consists of
all content and pages located within the study.iitm.ac.in web domain and all related mobile
applications), including accessing any course material, chat rooms, or other electronic
services.
These TOS and the Honor Code are agreements (the "Agreements") between you and IIT
Madras. By using this site, you accept and agree to be legally bound by the Agreements,
whether or not you are a registered user.
Please also read the Privacy Policy for the IIT Madras study.iitm.ac.in Site before you use
any portion of this Site. The Privacy Policy describes how your personal data is collected
and processed when you use this Site. If you do not understand or do not wish to be bound
by the terms of the Agreements or Privacy Policy, you should not use the Site.
IIT Madras reserves the right to modify these TOS at any time without advance notice. Any
changes to these TOS will be effective immediately upon posting on this page, with an
updated effective date. By accessing the IIT Madras https://study.iitm.ac.in/ Site after any
changes have been made, you signify your agreement on a prospective basis to the
modified TOS and all of the changes. Be sure to return to this page periodically to ensure
familiarity with the most current version of these TOS.
Any version of these TOS in a language other than English is provided for convenience and
you understand and agree that the English language version will control if there is any
conflict.
Rules for Online Conduct

You agree that you are responsible for your own use of the IIT Madras Study Site and for
your User Postings. “User Postings” means all content submitted, posted, published, or
distributed on the IIT Madras Study Site by you or other users of the IIT Madras Study Site,
including but not limited to all forum posts, wiki edits, notes, questions, comments, videos,
and file uploads. You agree that you will use the IIT Madras Study Site in compliance with
these Agreements, and all applicable local, state, national and international laws, rules and
regulations, including copyright laws, any laws regarding the transmission of technical data
exported from your country of residence, and applicable laws.
As a condition of your use of the IIT Madras Study Site, you will not use the IIT Madras
Study Site in any manner intended to damage, disable, overburden, or impair any IIT
Madras server or the network(s) connected to any IIT Madras server or to interfere with any
other party’s use and enjoyment of the IIT Madras Study Site. You may not attempt to gain
unauthorized access to the IIT Madras Study Site, other accounts, computer systems, or
networks connected to any IIT Madras server through hacking, password mining, or any
other means. You may not obtain or attempt to obtain any materials or information stored on
the IIT Madras Study Site, its servers, or associated computers through any means not
intentionally made available through the IIT Madras Study Site. If you are a registered user,
you will not share your password or let anyone else access or compromise your account.
Furthermore, you agree not to scrape, or otherwise download in bulk, any IIT Madras Study
Site content, including but not limited to a list or directory of users on the system, User
Postings or user information, online textbooks, course materials, or trademarks and logos.
You agree not to misrepresent or attempt to misrepresent your identity while using the IIT
Madras Study Site (although you are welcome and encouraged to use an anonymous
username in the forums and to act in a manner that keeps your identity concealed).
Strictly Prohibited Items
The following items are strictly prohibited on the IIT Madras Study Site:
Content that defames, harasses or threatens others;
Content that discusses illegal activities with the intent to commit them;
Content that infringes another’s intellectual property, including, but not limited to, copyrights
or trademarks;
Profane, pornographic, obscene, indecent or unlawful content;
Advertising or any form of commercial solicitation;
Content related to partisan political activities;
Viruses, trojan horses, worms, time bombs, corrupted files, malware, spyware, or any other
similar software that may damage the operation of another’s computer or property; and
Content that contains intentionally inaccurate information or that is posted with the intent of
misleading others (this list, collectively, “Strictly Prohibited Items”).
You may not submit, post, publish, share, or otherwise distribute any of the above strictly
prohibited items on or via the IIT Madras Study Site.

User Accounts
In order to create a user account, you must provide your full name, and an email address.
You agree that you will never divulge or share access or access information for your user
account with any third party for any reason. In accessing specific courses inside the portal,
you may be prompted to enter additional optional information (e.g., your age group, your
current role, etc.). You represent that all information provided by you is accurate and current.
You agree to maintain and update your information to keep it accurate and current.
You also understand and agree that your profile details will be shared with the IIT Madras
BS Degree Program course instructors.
Apart from the information provided online you may be required to provide in application
forms or as required from time to time hard copies of certificates, identity cards or any other
details as deemed necessary. You may also be required to produce the originals at any point
for verification during the program. You agree to provide all such information in an accurate
and true manner.
We care about the confidentiality and security of your personal information. Please see our
Privacy Policy for more information about the collection and use of data on the IIT Madras
Study Site.
Entry Criteria
IIT Madras may have qualifier exams and other entry criteria at its sole discretion. IIT
Madras BS Degree Program’s criteria for Eligibility to Apply will be as stated in our website.
IIT Madras may require the candidates to produce relevant certificates as proof of eligibility,
at any point of time during the tenure of the candidate’s participation in the program. If it is
found at any time that the information provided is false or certificates as requested have not
been provided, IITM at its sole discretion may terminate the candidate from the program or
restrict the candidate from accessing the material or providing the examination or may not
issue the certificate for the program. Candidates are hereby understanding, agreeing and
acknowledging this. The rules and regulations relating to the program will also be posted at
the website at onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. If there is any forgery or misrepresentation, IIT
Madras may take independent action.
Your Right to use Content on the IIT Madras Study Site
Unless indicated as being in the public domain, the content on the IIT Madras Study Site is
protected by Indian and foreign copyright laws. Unless otherwise expressly stated on the IIT
Madras Study Site, the texts, exams, videos, images, and other instructional materials
provided with the courses and programs offered on the IIT Madras Study Site are for your
personal use in connection with those courses and programs only. Certain reference
documents, digital textbooks, articles, and other information on the IIT Madras Study Site
are used with the permission of third parties, and use of that information is subject to certain
rules and conditions, which will be posted along with the information. By using the IIT

Madras Study Site, you agree to abide by all such rules and conditions. You agree to retain
all copyright and other notices on any content you obtain from the IIT Madras Study Site. All
rights in the IIT Madras Study Site and its content, if not expressly granted, are reserved.
Use FOR Personalization and Pedagogical Improvements
Our goal is to provide current and future visitors to the IIT Madras Study Site with the best
possible educational experience. To further this goal, we sometimes present different users
with different versions of course materials and software. We do this to personalize the
experience to the individual learner (to assess the learner’s level of ability and learning style,
and present materials best suited to the learner), to improve our understanding of the
learning process, and to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of our course materials,
payment models, platform features, and offerings. We may publish or otherwise publicize
results from this process, but, unless otherwise permitted under the Privacy Policy, those
publications or public disclosures will not include your personal information.
User Postings
USER POSTINGS REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
By submitting or distributing your User Postings, you affirm, represent, and warrant (1) that
you have the necessary rights, licenses, consents, and/or permissions to reproduce and
publish the User Postings and to authorize IIT Madras and its users to reproduce, modify,
publish, and otherwise use and distribute your User Postings in a manner consistent with the
licenses granted by you below, and (2) that neither your submission of your User Postings
nor the exercise of the licenses granted below will infringe or violate the rights of any third
party. You, and not IIT Madras, are solely responsible for your User Postings and the
consequences of posting or publishing them.
LICENSE GRANT TO IIT MADRAS
By submitting or distributing your User Postings, you hereby grant to IIT Madras (as
described below) a worldwide, non-exclusive, transferable, assignable, sub licensable, fully
paid-up, royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable right and license to host, transfer, display,
perform, reproduce, modify, distribute, redistribute, relicense, and otherwise use, make
available, and exploit your User Postings, in whole or in part, in any form and in any media
formats and through any media channels (now known or hereafter developed)
Certificates / Degrees and Other Products & Services
GENERAL
From time to time, IIT Madras Study Program may offer services and products for a fee (for
example, course certificates, degree) based on the eligibility criteria that IITM may determine
from time to time. For anything that you choose to purchase on the IIT Madras Study Site,
you agree to pay all applicable fees when due. As described in the Privacy Policy, the
processing of your payment information is done by a third-party payment vendor, and you

will be routed to a secure payment flow controlled by that vendor to complete the payment
transaction. Once your payment transaction is completed, confirmation will be displayed on
an IIT Madras Study page, and you will receive a confirmation email with your name, order
number, and the payment amount. Please retain this email for your records as this
information will be required if you seek a refund from IIT Madras.
CERTIFICATES
IIT Madras Study Site may offer Verified Certificates of Achievement for courses (a
“Certificate”) or certificates for programs (for example, a Foundational Level or Diploma
Level certificate or a Degree Certificate) for learners who, in IIT Madras’s judgment, have
satisfactorily demonstrated mastery of the course or program material. Certificates will be
issued by IIT Madras Study Program and the decision whether a certificate will be awarded
to a given learner will be solely within the discretion of IIT Madras.
Subject to the foregoing, you will be required to pay a fee and complete the ID verification
process for Verified Certificates.
In order to authenticate your identity for a Verified Certificate, you may be prompted to take
a photo of yourself, as well as a photo of an acceptable form of photo ID, and upload your
digital signature. Although these items are collected by IIT Madras in accordance with these
TOS and the Privacy Policy, you should be aware that the actual authentication of your
identity is performed by an IIT Madras third-party service provider and this information will
be used only for the purpose of verifying your identity. Acceptable forms of photo ID’s are:
Government or State-issued driver’s license
Passport
National ID card
State or Province ID card (including cards issued by motor vehicle agencies)
In order to be accepted by IIT Madras, your photo ID must:
Contain your full name exactly (excluding hyphens, accents, and spaces);
Contain a relatively current photograph of yourself;
Be an original document; photocopied documents cannot be accepted; and
Be current and valid; expired documents cannot be accepted.
If you do not possess a photo ID meeting the criteria described above, IIT Madras will be
unable to provide you with a Verified Certificate.
NO OTHER ENROLLMENT
Solely as a result of enrolling in or completing a course or program provided by IIT Madras
you will not be entitled to use any of the resources beyond the online courses or programs
provided on the IIT Madras Study Site and will not be eligible to receive student privileges or

benefits provided to students enrolled in other degree or other credit- or credential-bearing
programs of the IIT Madras.
Trademarks
Use of IIT MADRAS, IIT Names, Trademarks, AND Service Marks
The “IIT Madras,” “IIT” names, logos and seals are trademarks (“Trademarks”) of the
respective entities. Likewise, the names, logos, and seals are Trademarks owned by IIT
Madras. You may not use any of these Trademarks, or any variations thereof, without the
owner’s prior written consent. You may not use any of these Trademarks, or any variations
thereof, for promotional purposes, or in any way that deliberately or inadvertently claims,
suggests or, in the owner’s sole judgment, gives the appearance or impression of a
relationship with or endorsement by the owner.
All Trademarks not owned by IIT Madras that appear on the IIT Madras Study Site or on or
through the services made available on or through the IIT Madras Study Site, if any, are the
property of their respective owners.
Nothing contained on the IIT Madras Study Site should be construed as granting, by
implication, estoppel, or otherwise, any license or right to use any Trademark displayed on
the IIT Madras Study Site without the written permission of the owner of the applicable
Trademark.
Copyright Infringement
Copyright owners who believe their material has been infringed on the IIT Madras Study Site
should contact IIT Madras’s designated copyright agent at support@onlinedgree.iitm.ac.in or
at --Address of Copyright Agent-- Attention: IIT Madras DMCA Agent/General Counsel.

Communication must include:
Identification of the copyrighted work, or, in the case of multiple works at the same location,
a representative list of such works at that site.
Identification of the material that is claimed to be infringing or to be the subject of infringing
activity. You must include sufficient information for us to locate the material (e.g., URL, IP
address, computer name).
Information for us to be able to contact the complaining party (e.g., email address, phone
number).
A statement that the complaining party believes that the use of the material has not been
authorized by the copyright owner or an authorized agent.
A statement that the information in the notification is accurate and that the complaining party
is authorized to act on behalf of the copyright owner.
Disclaimers of Warranty / Limitations of Liabilities
THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE AND ANY INFORMATION, CONTENT OR SERVICES
MADE AVAILABLE ON OR THROUGH THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE ARE PROVIDED

“AS IS” AND “AS AVAILABLE” WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND (EXPRESS, IMPLIED
OR OTHERWISE), INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND
NON-INFRINGEMENT, EXCEPT IN SO FAR AS ANY SUCH IMPLIED WARRANTIES MAY
NOT BE DISCLAIMED UNDER APPLICABLE LAW. IIT MADRAS DOES NOT WARRANT
THAT THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE WILL OPERATE IN AN UNINTERRUPTED OR
ERROR-FREE MANNER, THAT THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE IS FREE OF VIRUSES
OR OTHER HARMFUL COMPONENTS, OR THAT THE COURSES OR CONTENT
PROVIDED WILL MEET YOUR NEEDS OR EXPECTATIONS. IIT MADRAS ALSO MAKES
NO WARRANTY ABOUT THE ACCURACY, COMPLETENESS, TIMELINESS, OR
QUALITY OF THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE OR ANY COURSES OR CONTENT, OR
THAT ANY PARTICULAR COURSES OR CONTENT WILL CONTINUE TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE. USE OF THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE, AND THE CONTENT AND
SERVICES OBTAINED FROM OR THROUGH THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE, IS AT
YOUR OWN RISK. YOUR ACCESS TO OR DOWNLOAD OF INFORMATION,
MATERIALS, OR DATA THROUGH THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE OR ANY REFERENCE
SITES IS AT YOUR OWN DISCRETION AND RISK, AND YOU WILL BE SOLELY
RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY DAMAGE TO YOUR PROPERTY (INCLUDING YOUR
COMPUTER SYSTEM) OR LOSS OF DATA THAT RESULTS FROM THE DOWNLOAD OR
USE OF SUCH MATERIAL OR DATA, UNLESS OTHERWISE EXPRESSLY PROVIDED
FOR IN THE PRIVACY POLICY.
IIT Madras does it its best to ensure that all information on the Website is accurate. If you
find any inaccuracies on the website, please let IIT Madras know by sending an email to
support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in and we will take steps to look into the matter and correct,
where we agree, as soon as practicable.
Third-party Services; Links to Other Websites
The IIT Madras Study Site and individual courses may be integrated with third-party services
or include hyperlinks to websites maintained or controlled by third parties. IIT Madras and
the IIT Madras Participants are not responsible for and do not routinely screen, approve,
review or endorse the contents of or use of any of the products or services that may be
offered by such third parties. If you decide to access any third-party services or linked
third-party websites, you do so at your own risk.
Non-Liability
TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, YOU AGREE THAT
NEITHER IIT MADRAS NOR ANY OF THE IIT MADRAS PARTICIPANTS WILL BE LIABLE
TO YOU FOR ANY LOSS OR DAMAGES, EITHER ACTUAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL,
ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THESE TERMS OF SERVICE, OR YOUR (OR ANY
THIRD PARTY’S) USE OF OR INABILITY TO USE THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE, OR
YOUR PLACEMENT OF CONTENT ON THE IIT MADRAS STUDY SITE, OR YOUR
RELIANCE UPON INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM OR THROUGH THE IIT MADRAS
STUDY SITE, WHETHER YOUR CLAIM IS BASED IN CONTRACT, TORT, STATUTORY

OR OTHER LAW. IN PARTICULAR, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW, NEITHER IIT MADRAS NOR ANY OF THE IIT MADRAS
PARTICIPANTS WILL HAVE ANY LIABILITY FOR ANY CONSEQUENTIAL, INDIRECT,
PUNITIVE, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, WHETHER
FORESEEABLE OR UNFORESEEABLE AND WHETHER OR NOT IIT MADRAS OR ANY
OF THE IIT MADRAS PARTICIPANTS HAS BEEN NEGLIGENT OR OTHERWISE AT
FAULT (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS FOR DEFAMATION, ERRORS,
LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF DATA, OR INTERRUPTION IN AVAILABILITY OF DATA).
CERTAIN LAWS DO NOT ALLOW LIMITATIONS ON IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR THE
EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION OF CERTAIN DAMAGES. IF THESE LAWS APPLY TO YOU,
SOME OR ALL OF THE ABOVE DISCLAIMERS, EXCLUSIONS, OR LIMITATIONS MAY
NOT APPLY TO YOU, AND YOU MIGHT HAVE ADDITIONAL RIGHTS.
Indemnification
You agree to defend, hold harmless, and indemnify IIT Madras and their respective
subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, faculty, students, fellows, governing board members, agents
and employees from and against any third-party claims, actions, or demands arising out of,
resulting from or in any way related to your use of the IIT Madras Study Site, including any
liability or expense arising from any and all claims, losses, damages (actual and
consequential), suits, judgments, litigation costs, and attorneys’ fees, of every kind and
nature. In such a case, IIT Madras or the applicable IIT Madras Participant will provide you
with written notice of such claim, suit, or action.
Additional Terms
TERMINATION RIGHTS; DISCONTINUATION OF COURSES AND CONTENT.
You agree that IIT Madras, in its sole discretion, may terminate your use of the IIT Madras
Study Site or your participation in it, for any reason or no reason, upon notice to you. It is IIT
Madras’s policy to terminate in appropriate circumstances the accounts of users of the IIT
Madras Study Site who are repeat copyright infringers. IIT Madras and the IIT Madras
Participants reserve the right at any time in their sole discretion to cancel, delay, reschedule
or alter the format of any course offered through IIT Madras, or to cease providing any part
or all of the IIT Madras Study Site content or related services, and you agree that neither IIT
Madras nor any of the IIT Madras Participants will have any liability to you for such an
action. If you no longer desire to participate in the IIT Madras Study Site, you may terminate
your participation at any time. The rights granted to you hereunder will terminate upon any
termination of your right to use the IIT Madras Study Site, but the other provisions of the
Agreements will survive any such termination.
ENTIRE AGREEMENT

The Agreements constitute the entire agreement between you and IIT Madras with respect
to your use of the IIT Madras Study Site, superseding any prior agreements between you
and IIT Madras regarding your use of the IIT Madras Study Site.
WAIVER AND SEVERABILITY
The failure of IIT Madras to exercise or enforce any right or provision of the Agreements
shall not constitute a waiver of such right or provision. If any provision of the Agreements is
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the parties nevertheless agree that
the court should endeavor to give effect to the parties’ intentions as reflected in the provision
and the other provisions of the Agreements shall remain in full force and effect.
CHOICE OF LAW/FORUM SELECTION
You agree that the Agreements and any claim or dispute arising out of or relating to the
Agreements or any content or service obtained from or through the IIT Madras Study Site
will be governed by the laws of the Union of India, excluding its conflicts of law provisions.
You agree that all such claims and disputes will be heard and resolved exclusively in the
state high court located in and serving Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. You consent to the
personal jurisdiction of those courts over you for this purpose, and you waive and agree not
to assert any objection to such proceedings in those courts (including any defense or
objection of lack of proper jurisdiction or venue or inconvenience of forum).

E) Privacy Policy
This Privacy Policy applies to information that IIT Madras collects through the IIT Madras
Study site when you interact with IIT Madras, with other users, and generally with the IIT
Madras Study site - study.iitm.ac.in.
Your information is received and controlled by IIT Madras according to this Privacy Policy
when you sign up for a IIT Madras account or otherwise use the IIT Madras Study site.
IIT Madras is solely and independently responsible for its own privacy practices.
IIT Madras cares about the confidentiality and security of your information. So, if you do not
accept the terms of this Privacy Policy, then please do not access, browse, or register in the
IIT Madras Study site or register for any courses. If you choose not to provide certain
information required to provide you with various products and services offered on the IIT
Madras Study site, then you may not be able to establish a user account or obtain those
products or services.

This Privacy Policy is organized as follows:

1. Information that IIT Madras collects from you (including Personal Information)
2. Cookies and Tracking Technologies on the IIT Madras Study site
3. How your information is used
4. How your information is shared
5. How to manage your Personal Information
6. Storage & Security
7. Privacy Policy updates
8. Contact information
Information that IIT Madras collects from you
(including Personal Information)
IIT Madras directly collects information when you:
sign up for an IIT Madras Study user account
register and participate in online courses
send email messages to IIT Madras Study support (including messages to learner support)
participate in user surveys; and
participate in public forums, webinars, and other interactive experiences on the IIT Madras
Study site. IIT Madras also indirectly collects usage information about your visit to the IIT
Madras Study site, as explained in the section below titled ‘Cookies and Tracking
Technologies’.
IIT Madras does not itself collect or store financial account numbers or identification issued
by a governmental entity, employer, or other authority. Instead, if you choose to make a
payment on the IIT Madras Study site, for example to register for Proctored Exams, you will
be directed to IIT Madras’s third-party payment processor and IIT Madras’s third-party ID
verification service provider. If you do not wish to submit the required authentication or
payment information, then you will not be able to register for an IIT Madras BS Degree exam
and earn a certificate/degree.
IIT Madras requires your Personal Information in circumstances when you:

Sign up in IIT Madras Study Website (name, email address)
Register in an IIT Madras Study course

Participate in proctored exams or other course facilitation processes (so that IIT Madras’s
third-party vendor can monitor and assess the integrity of your course activity); or
Earn a Certificate/ Degree (the certificate will have your name on it).
To the extent that IIT Madras associates the information that IIT Madras collects directly or
indirectly with an individual (for example, you), the association is based on Personal
Information in your account profile.
You may voluntarily choose to share additional Personal Information on the IIT Madras
Study site. For example:

In applying for financial assistance; or
when participating in a course, forum, webinar, or other interactive experience on the IIT
Madras Study site (noting that in some cases, this information is shared with a third party
that provides tools or other assistance for the IIT Madras Study site or a course).
IIT Madras encourages you to use discretion before voluntarily sharing additional Personal
Information on the IIT Madras Study site. (If you later choose to delete your IIT Madras
account, deletion of your Personal Information will be subject to the process and limits
outlined below.)
Cookies and Tracking Technologies on the IIT Madras Study site
IIT Madras Study Portal uses Cookies and other common Tracking Technologies on the IIT
Madras Study site and in email communications to help IIT Madras better understand your
use and needs of the IIT Madras Study site, current and future IIT Madras-related products
and services, and how IIT Madras can improve.
For example:

Based on your cookie settings, IIT Madras may track information indicating, among other
things, which pages of the IIT Madras Study site were visited, the order in which they were
visited, when they were visited, and which hyperlinks and other user interface controls were
used
IIT Madras may log the IP address, operating system, and browser software (including
mobile use and device type when you use IIT Madras native mobile apps) you used when
accessing the IIT Madras Study site, and IIT Madras may be able to determine from an IP
address your Internet Service Provider and the geographic location of your point of
connectivity; and
IIT Madras may track and collect information from emails that IIT Madras sends to you, for
example, whether you opened the email or clicked on any links from the email.

IIT Madras may also partner with third parties to help us track and understand your activity
on the IIT Madras Study site, how you interact with IIT Madras’s social media, and how you
find or may be referred to the IIT Madras Study site.
IIT Madras may use Cookies and other Tracking Technologies for the following purposes:
when necessary for system administration, security, and integrity to ensure the IIT Madras
Study site works properly for you. Without these technologies, the IIT Madras Study site may
not function correctly
to enable analytics, performance and functionality, to help IIT Madras gather information
about how visitors use the IIT Madras Study site and monitor IIT Madras Study site
performance, and to enhance your experience by recognizing and remembering whether
you have visited the IIT Madras Study site before and may have any personal preferences;
and
to support marketing by enabling IIT Madras to deliver content relevant to your interests on
the IIT Madras Study site and third-party sites based on how you interact with IIT Madras
advertisements or content. IIT Madras may use “first-party” cookies, which means cookies
served by IIT Madras and also “third-party” cookies, which means cookies served by third
parties that help IIT Madras track this information.
You have some options for managing Cookies and other Tracking Technologies. These
include:

Modifying your browser settings: You should be able to control how and whether your web
browser accepts Cookies by adjusting its privacy and security settings. The “help” feature of
the menu bar on most browsers will tell you how to stop accepting new Cookies, how to
receive notification of new Cookies, and how to disable existing Cookies. If you reject IIT
Madras’s Cookies, many functions and conveniences of the IIT Madras Study site may not
work properly.
Opting-out of certain third-party tracking and advertising: Some of the third parties used by
IIT Madras for Cookies and Tracking Technologies offer the ability to opt-out from their
tracking by following processes described on their websites. IIT Madras is not responsible
for the effectiveness of any third-party opt-out options.
How your information is used
IIT Madras may use information, including Personal Information, to carry out the following
purposes:

Operate and improve the IIT Madras Study site – This includes creating and improving
features that support the IIT Madras community and enable IIT Madras Study site usage at
scale. This also includes personalizing the IIT Madras Study site, so that your learning
experience is tailored to your interests and needs.
Create, administer, provide, and teach courses – This includes creating and improving the
delivery of online courses and programs on IIT Madras. This also includes personalizing

courses, so your learning experience is tailored to your interests and needs, and assessing
your performance and awarding certificates/degrees.
Offer and improve products and services – This includes enabling you to navigate the IIT
Madras Study site, to register and participate in courses on the IIT Madras Study site, to
learn effectively in such courses, and to purchase or obtain products and services on the IIT
Madras Study site such as registering for Proctored Exams.
Develop and maintain the security and performance of the IIT Madras Study site – This
includes tracking IIT Madras Study site outages and creating software solutions, detecting
violations of the Honor Code and Terms of Service, and monitoring uses, misuses, and
potential misuses of the IIT Madras Study site.
Communicate with you – This includes answering your course and platform questions,
notifying you of course and IIT Madras Study site maintenance and updates, marketing to
you about course offerings, programs, news, and related products and services of IIT
Madras or IIT Madras affiliates, and as permitted under applicable law, sending you
communications about products or services of selected business partners that may be of
interest to you.
Support scientific research – This includes collaborating to enable and conduct research
about how learners access and master course materials online, with the goal of improving
course outcomes.
Track IIT Madras Study site usage against goals and mission – This includes performing
analytics to evaluate access to and performance in courses and course-related products and
services and to report aggregate usage information (not Personal Information) to business
partners and external audiences.
Exercise, enforce, and comply with legal rights and obligations – This includes responding to
court orders, or other legal process; and investigating, preventing, or taking action regarding
illegal activities, suspected fraud, security or technical issues, or to protect the rights,
property, or safety of IIT Madras, or others, and as otherwise required by applicable law.
IIT Madras may also seek your consent for additional uses of information, including Personal
Information, and will use it only for the purpose described to you. All use of Personal
Information is subject to applicable law.
How your information is shared
IIT Madras may share information, including Personal Information, with third parties for the
following purposes:

With service providers, contractors, and other third parties that help carry out the uses
described above – IIT Madras requires third parties to: (1) abide by this Privacy Policy and
applicable law; (2) handle Personal Information in a confidential manner and maintain
adequate security; and (3) use Personal Information only as needed to fulfill the relevant
purpose(s). In some cases, the IIT Madras Study site and individual courses are integrated
with third-party services or contain links to websites published by third parties, including
other content providers as well as service providers. These third parties are responsible for

their own privacy practices, so you should pay attention anytime you are redirected to a
third-party website and be sure to review its privacy policy.
With other learners in courses that you take and with other visitors to the IIT Madras Study
site, to create an interactive learning environment, support class participation, and share
course information – this includes sharing comments, coursework, or other information or
content that you submit to a portion of the IIT Madras Study site designed for viewing by
other class members or for public communication. This also includes providing opportunities
for you to communicate with other users who may have similar interests or educational
goals, for instance, recommending specific study partners or connecting potential student
mentees and mentors. In such cases, IIT Madras may use all information collected about
you to determine who might be interested in communicating with you, but will only provide
others your username (for clarity, no disclosure of your real name or email address).
With employers, government programs, institutions, or other enterprises that sponsor your
registration in a course for training or other educational purposes – If an entity pays for or
otherwise sponsors your Verified Certificate or course participation, IIT Madras will share
information with the entity as needed to confirm your registration, participation, progress,
and completion status in that course.
With affiliates of IIT Madras, or with successors in the event of a reorganization, for their use
consistent with this Privacy Policy.
IIT Madras may also seek your consent for additional disclosures of information, including
Personal Information, and will share it only as described to you. In addition, IIT Madras may
share with the public and with third parties, including but not limited to researchers and
business partners, information and Personal Information that is de-identified or aggregated
in a manner that does not personally identify you.
How to manage your personal information
You can manage your Personal Information through learner features on the IIT Madras
Study site and requests to the IIT Madras learner support team. IIT Madras will provide
support to the extent required by applicable law and more broadly when possible, as a
courtesy in our sole discretion. IIT Madras will notify you in the event that IIT Madras is
unable to meet a request that is not legally required.
Access and correct your Personal Information
Much of your Personal Information is available in your IIT Madras Study profile. Your name
and other identifiable profile information is editable through the profile settings in your
account except as noted below. Your account dashboard lists all current and archived
courses in which you have registered and may include links to any Certificates/Degrees you
may have earned. Please contact IIT Madras Study learner support to access and update
this or other information.
EXCEPTIONS

Registered Email Addresses cannot ever be changed. This is an IIT Madras system
restriction. Because email address identify you in courses and elsewhere on the IIT Madras
Study site.
IIT Madras does not track or index every time or every place on the IIT Madras Study site
when or where a learner may volunteer Personal Information, so IIT Madras will not be able
to help you locate or manage all such instances. IIT Madras encourages you to use
discretion before volunteering Personal Information on the IIT Madras Study site.
RESTRICT OR OBJECT TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL INFORMATION
If you want to manage emails and other communications to you, you may update your
preferences in the respective IIT Madras Study course profile, follow the steps that may be
described in links at the bottom of email messages, or contact IIT Madras Study learner
support. You may object to, or request that IIT Madras stop, its use of your Personal
Information for other purposes by contacting the IIT Madras Study learner support team.
Please note that if you choose to restrict IIT Madras’s ability to process Personal
Information, and the processing is otherwise required to provide you with various services
and products offered on the IIT Madras Study site, you may not be able to establish an IIT
Madras Study user account or register for a course, and IIT Madras may not be able to
provide you with those services or products.
Delete account and Personal Information
To request deletion of your IIT Madras Study account and Personal Information, you should
write to the learner support team. Because deletion on the IIT Madras system is a
permanent action and cannot be reversed, IIT Madras may ask you to complete a process
that aims to confirm your authority to manage the IIT Madras Study account affected by your
request.
You can however unsubscribe from all the existing mailing lists by clicking on the
“Unsubscribe” option provided in the Progress section of each course.
EXCEPTIONS
Unsubscription will not apply to historical activity logs or archives unless and until these logs
and data naturally “age-off” the IIT Madras BS Degree system.
IIT Madras does not track or index every time or every place on the IIT Madras Study site
when or where a learner may volunteer Personal Information, so IIT Madras will not be able
to help you locate or manage all such instances. IIT Madras encourages you to use
discretion before voluntarily sharing your Personal Information on the IIT Madras Study site.
IIT Madras will archive course data (in a manner and to the extent permitted under
applicable law) to serve its mission to enable scientific research on cognitive science and
education.

IIT Madras cannot always delete records of past interactions and transactions. For example,
records relating to previous exam registrations on the IIT Madras Study site must be
retained for financial reporting, audit, and compliance reasons.
IIT Madras will retain and use Personal Information as necessary to comply with its legal
obligations, resolve disputes, enforce its agreements, and as otherwise permitted by
applicable law.
Data Retention
IIT Madras will retain your Personal Information for as long as your account is active or as
needed to provide you with services; to maintain a record of your transactions for financial
reporting, audit, and compliance purposes; and to comply with IIT Madras’s legal
obligations, resolve disputes, enforce its agreements, and as otherwise permitted by
applicable law. Upon your request that IIT Madras deactivate your account and delete your
information, IIT Madras will follow the process described above, including without limitation,
archiving your course data (in a manner and to the extent permitted under applicable law) to
serve its mission to enable scientific research on cognitive science and education.
Storage & Security
IIT Madras stores information, including Personal Information, on its own servers and also
on servers of companies that IIT Madras hires to provide services. In each case, information
may be stored in India and in countries where IIT Madras’s service providers operate and
the privacy laws of India shall be applicable.

IIT Madras controls its own copy of information collected through the IIT Madras Study site
and may have an information security program designed to protect information in its
possession or control. This may be done through a variety of privacy and security policies,
processes, and procedures. IIT Madras may use administrative, physical, and technical
safeguards that reasonably and appropriately protect the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of the information that it collects, receives, stores, or transmits. Nonetheless, no
method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100% secure;
and therefore, IIT Madras cannot guarantee its absolute security. While IIT Madras will work
hard to ensure the integrity and security of its network and systems, IIT Madras cannot
guarantee that its security measures will prevent “hackers” or other unauthorized persons
from illegally accessing or obtaining information.

If IIT Madras learns of a security breach involving its copy of your Personal Information, IIT
Madras may attempt to notify you electronically so that you may take appropriate protective
steps. By using the IIT Madras Study site or providing Personal Information to IIT Madras,
you agree that IIT Madras can communicate with you electronically regarding security,
privacy, and administrative issues relating to your use of the IIT Madras Study site. If a
security systems breach occurs, IIT Madras may post a notice on the IIT Madras Study site

and may send an email to you at the email address associated with your IIT Madras BS
Degree account.
Privacy Policy Updates
This Privacy Policy will be reviewed and updated from time to time. When changes are
made, the Privacy Policy will be labeled as “Revised (date),” indicating that you should
review the new terms, which will be effective immediately upon posting on this page, with an
updated effective date. By accessing the IIT Madras Study site after any changes have been
made, you accept the modified Privacy Policy and any changes contained therein. In case
you miss the notification referenced above, be sure to return to this page periodically to
ensure familiarity with the most current version of this Privacy Policy.
Contact Information
If you have privacy concerns, have disclosed data you would prefer to keep private, or would
like to access the Personal Information that IIT Madras maintains about you, please contact
us at support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in.

F) Discussion Forum Etiquette
Discussion Forum is a place for both learners and the course team to interact and clarify the
queries related to the course content. To maintain a clean and supportive environment, it is
important that every participant in the forum strictly maintains an etiquette while posting or
responding in the discussion forum. A set of general discussion forum etiquettes are given
below. Please read through them to understand more about appropriate and acceptable use
of IITM BSc Discussion Forums.
Discussions on Course Content
Limit your discussions to the “Unit(s)/Lesson(s)” that they are related to. Doing so ensures
that the discussions are clustered around the most specific content; this also enables easier
searching of the various threads being posted.
If your posting is directly related to something in the course content, you may wish to provide
more details so that others can find or trace it easily. For example, you may want to cite from
a particular video, which diagram/slide, timing details, reading materials etc.
Treat the questions and comments from your fellow learners seriously. Think about the
issues they have raised, offer your own thoughts, research and propose your solutions to
the problems they have posed.
Before you create a new post, review the existing threads to see if there are already highly
similar or identical postings. If a post already exists and has not been answered, use the
Upvote button (for Discussions). Once the post gets answered, you can remove the Upvote

What should not be posted on the forum
Avoid writing about any topic that is not related to the content such as the videos,
assignments questions etc.
Any discussions on graded assignments before end of due date for these assignments.
Any queries regarding administrative issues such as grading policy, exams, exam centre
related, etc should be addressed only to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in and not written on
the discussion forum.
Such posts will be removed by the moderators of the forum.
On Tone and Courtesy in Writing
The "tone" is a very important part of electronic communication. When you read your
message out loud, does it sound the way you would speak to another student in the
classroom? If no, then please rewrite the post.
Before publishing your comment, make sure that the grammar and spelling of the text to be
published are correct. Do not write comments in all capital letters. Use capital letters only
where appropriate.
Respect the opinions of your classmates. If you feel the need to disagree, do so respectfully
and acknowledge the valid points in your classmate’s argument. Acknowledge that others
are entitled to have their own perspective on the issue. This will help both you and your
peers to grow intellectually.
Refrain from inappropriate language derogatory remarks or personal attacks in the course
forum.
Humor can be difficult to convey in text. So make sure everyone realizes when you are
trying to be funny. It is easy for messages to be misinterpreted since there are no physical
gestures or voice inflections that accompany the text.
Think through and re-read your comments before you post them.
Remember that English is not the primary language of many students. Avoid the use of
slang or abbreviations.
Write responses in your own words and give credit when referencing the work or ideas of
others’.
Reporting a Post
If you see an inappropriate post, please alert the course team by right clicking on the post
and flagging this is (see screenshot below) or forward the same to
support-es@study.iitm.ac.in

Fig: Reporting a post to course team
Post Moderation Policy
Any content that the Forum administrators deem malicious in nature or insulting toward
people will be removed immediately. Forum administrators reserve the right to determine

what is and is not acceptable content. Serial Violators will be given a warning and if found
repeating the mistake may also be banned from the discussion forum of the course either for
a short period of time or for the duration of the course.

Contact: support-es@study.iitm.ac.in
G) Honor Code
In order to participate in the IIT Madras BS degree programme, you must agree to the Honor
Code given below and any additional terms specific to a course or program. This Honor
Code, and any additional terms, will be posted on our website - onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in.
Honour Code Pledge
By registering in an IIT Madras BS Degree programme, I agree that I will:

Complete all tests and assignments on my own, unless collaboration on an assignment is
explicitly permitted.
Maintain only one user account, unless IIT Madras has approved the use of a separate user
account in connection with an employer-sponsored or university-sponsored program.
Not let anyone else use my username and/or password.
Not engage in any activity that would dishonestly improve my results, or improve or hurt the
results of others.
Not engage in any activity that will cause grief or harm to the Study websites/portals or study
materials, including activities like hacking or accessing restricted materials.
Not post answers to problems that are being used to assess learner performance either
inside the course forums or on any other website.
Not resubmit or submit work (in identical or similar form) for multiple assignments without
prior explicit approval.
Not submit false or altered or fabricated admission documents including signatures or
certificates of enrollment or standing, registration forms, and medical certifications.
Violations
If you are found in violation of the Terms of Service or Honor Code, you may be subject to
one or more of the following actions:
Receiving a zero or no credit for an assignment;
Having any certificate/degree earned in the course or programme withheld or revoked;
Being unenrolled from a course or programme; or
Termination of your use of the IIT Madras Study Site.
Additional actions may be taken at the sole discretion of IIT Madras.
No refunds will be issued in the case of any corrective action for such violations.

Honor Code violations will be determined at the sole discretion of IIT Madras. You will be
notified if a determination has been made that you have violated this Honor Code and you
will be informed of the corresponding action that will be taken as a result of the violation.
Changing the Honour Code
Please note that we review and may make changes to this Honor Code from time to time.
Any changes to this Honor Code will be effective immediately upon posting on
onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in page, with an updated effective date. By accessing the IIT Madras
Study Site after any changes have been made, you signify your agreement on a prospective
basis to the modified Honor Code and any changes contained therein. Be sure to return to
this page periodically to ensure familiarity with the most current version of this Honor Code.
H) Code of Conduct
We, the students of IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME hold our work and activities in
the promotion of online education with very high regard. For this purpose, we will maintain
the highest standards of integrity, responsible behavior, and ethical and professional
conduct. We agree to be bound by the following rules:
Be respectful of others
We will respect others, including IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME students and
employees, and will act in a professional manner while participating in its activities.
We will respect the privacy of others and the protection of their personal information and
data.
Treat People Fairly
We will not engage in harassment of any kind, including sexual harassment, or bullying
behavior whether in person, via cybertechnology or otherwise.
We will not discriminate against any person because of characteristics protected by law
(e.g., age, ancestry, color, disability or handicap, national origin, race, religion, gender,
sexual or affectional orientation, gender identity, gender expression, appearance,
matriculation, political affiliation, marital status, social or professional status).
Refrain from Retaliation
We will not retaliate against any IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME student, employee
or other person who reports an act of misconduct, or who reports any violation of this Code
of Conduct.
We will not retaliate against any person who makes IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME
aware of the violation of any laws, rules or regulations in connection with IIT Madras BS
DEGREE PROGRAMME activities.
Comply with Applicable Laws
By submitting or distributing your User Postings, you hereby grant to IIT Madras (as
described below) a worldwide, non-exclusive, transferable, assignable, sub licensable, fully
paid-up, royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable right and license to host, transfer, display,
perform, reproduce, modify, distribute, redistribute, relicense, and otherwise use, make

available, and exploit your User Postings, in whole or in part, in any form and in any media
formats and through any media channels (now known or hereafter developed)
General
We will comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations governing IIT Madras BS
DEGREE PROGRAMME’s business conduct and all relevant procedures established by IIT
Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME whenever and wherever we are participating in IIT
Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME activities, including but not limited to the following:

Avoiding real or perceived conflicts of interest whenever possible, and disclosing them to
affected parties when they do exist.
Protecting confidential information belonging to IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME and
personal information belonging to IIT Madras BS DEGREE PROGRAMME students,
employees and other persons.
Not misusing or infringing the intellectual property of others.
I) Academic Malpractices
It is brought to the notice of all the students the following graded punishments approved by
the Senate will be imposed on those who indulge in Academic Malpractices – unfair means
during all examinations and assignments:
For rude behavior
Severe warning shall be issued to a student who is found to display rude behaviour towards
fellow students / invigilators / proctors/ support staff/ personnel of other agencies involved in
the exam process.
The student is liable to be expelled from the examination center or disconnected from the
Google Meet.
Malpractices and corresponding Punishments

Nature of Malpractice
Recommended Punishment
1.
Communicating with fellow students through any means to compromise the integrity of the
exams.
The erring student(s) shall be awarded `U’ grade in the course concerned and 30 hours of
community service.
2.

Possessing incriminating* materials inside the examination room/center
(or)
Possessing the answer scripts of another candidate to compromise the integrity of the
exams.
(or)
Sharing answers/answer scripts to another student or group of students to compromise the
integrity of the exams.
(or)
Exchange of answer scripts among students to compromise the integrity of the exams.
(or)
Individual referral of material/device, discussion with other students or anyone to
compromise the integrity of the exams.
The Steering Committee shall have the discretion to recommend one of the following
punishments.
The erring student(s) shall be awarded ‘U’ grade in the course concerned and one grade
less in all the other courses of the term in which the student has scored “D grade & above”
and 30 hours of community service. In case of ‘E’ or ‘U’ grade obtained, then the same
grade to be retained in the concerned term and 50 hours of community service.
(or)
The concerned student(s) shall be awarded `U’ grade in all the courses in the concerned
term.
3.
Involved in malpractice in the examination for the second time, in a premeditated manner.
The concerned student
Shall be awarded ‘U’ grade in all courses, in the concerned term
&
Shall be debarred from registering for courses and taking examinations in the subsequent
term.

4.
Impersonation in the examination
The concerned student
Shall be awarded `U’ grade in all courses, in the concerned term.
&
Shall be debarred from registering for courses and taking examinations in the next two
subsequent terms.
5.
a) Plagiarism in graded assignments for the first time

b) Repeated Plagiarism
‘0’ marks for copied assignment
&
10 % of marks deducted in the other assignments of the course
‘U’ Grade in the course
6.
Plagiarism/ Data Manipulation in documents related to projects, research activities, etc.
Steering committee will decide on suitable punishment.
For lower level of offense Recommended Punishment:
‘U’ grade in the relevant course.
For severe level of offense Recommended Punishment:
‘U’ grade in all courses of the term.
7.
Forging of any document
Expulsion from the programme.

(* incriminating materials including but not limited to written/printed material; unauthorized
additional sheets without or with write-ups, bits, scribbles on scales / handkerchief / on the
body / abuse of calculator / organizer / cell phone/ etc.)
(*incriminating materials during online remote proctored exams including but not limited to
accessing of sites not permitted, changing tabs, continuously getting logged out or getting
disconnected and reconnecting, referring books, talking to someone, keeping things other
than white sheet, computer, pen and calculator on the desk, keeping things under the desk,
not having video on in the mobile phone, candidate not matching the photo in the student
Database, unnecessary typing going on in the keyboard, not responding to the proctor,
asking multiple breaks, people moving about behind the candidate, etc.)
J) Non-Academic Malpractices
It is brought to the notice of all the learners that the following graded punishments approved
by the Senate will be imposed on those who conduct themselves in an unacceptable
manner while interacting with fellow learners, support staff or instructors. The nature of
infractions listed in this document is not exhaustive. The disciplinary committee will consider
other violations on a case-to-case basis.
Misconduct and corresponding Punishments

Nature of Misconduct
Recommended Punishment
1.
Rude behaviour towards fellow learners, support staff or instructors.

Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)
The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.
2.
Impersonation on Social Media or other public forums

Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)
The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.(or)
The student will be debarred from participating in internship and placement processes (or)
The student will be rusticated from the programme.
3.
Spreading false or misleading information about the programme/Institute and their
operations
Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)
The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.(or)
The student will be debarred from participating in internship and placement processes.
4.
Bypassing the available grievance redressal mechanisms from the programme/Institutes
and sharing unsubstantiated posts about the programme or the Institute on Social Media or
other public forums
For repeated offences
Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)
The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.(or)
The student will be debarred from participating in internship and placement processes.
5.
Cyberbullying* or intimidation of any kind
*Any aggressive, intentional act or behavior that is carried out by an individual or a group,
using electronic forms of contact, repeatedly and overtime against another person/group.

Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)

The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.(or)
The student will be debarred from participating in internship and placement processes (or)
The student will be rusticated from the programme.
6.
Disseminating programme specific information shared with learners on Social Media or any
other public forums
Repeated offence

Based on the nature and severity of the violation, the committee can recommend one of the
following punitive measures.
The concerned learner will be issued severe warning and put on probation. (or)
The student’s CCC will be reduced by 1/2/3/4 in the subsequent term.(or)
The student will be debarred from participating in internship and placement processes
Cyberbullying
What is ‘Cyberbullying’?
Any aggressive, intentional act or behavior that is carried out by an individual or a group,
using electronic forms of contact, repeatedly and overtime against another person/group.
What do Cyberbullies do?
Cyberbullies tend to resort to repeated aggressive behavior with intent to humiliate, scare,
anger, or shame the targeted person/group.
Examples of cyberbullying include, but are not limited to:
Spreading lies about or posting embarrassing photos of someone on social media;
Trolling or circulating memes that are aimed at another person
Impersonating someone and sending mean messages to others on their behalf;
Hacking personal accounts;
Flaming, which is the use of vulgar or insensitive language to attack someone;
Sending abusive, threatening, hurtful or inappropriate messages to harass someone;
Sharing someone’s private messages or picture or threatening/blackmailing to do so;
Threatening someone to commit an act of violence or threats of pornography;
Stalking someone and sending targeted messages etc.
ANNEXURE
List of accepted class 12 equivalents

A Diploma recognised by AICTE or a state board of technical education of at least 3 year
duration.
Any Public School / Board / University examination in India or in any foreign country
recognised as equivalent to the 10+2 system by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU).
Final examination of the two-year course of the Joint Services Wing of the National Defence
Academy.
General Certificate Education (GCE) examination (London / Cambridge / Sri Lanka) at the
Advanced (A) level.
High School Certificate Examination of the Cambridge University or International
Baccalaureate Diploma of the International Baccalaureate Office, Geneva.
Higher Secondary Certificate vocational examination.
Intermediate or two-year Pre-University examination conducted by a recognised Board /
University.
Senior Secondary School Examination conducted by the National Institute of Open
Schooling with a minimum of five subjects.
List of exam cities

-------- End of Document -------[1] Last updated: Aug 5, 2021
Publish
ed using Google Docs
Report abuseLearn more

May 2024 ES Grading document (Student)
Updated automatically every 5 minutes

BS in Electronic Systems
IIT Madras
May 2024

Grading Document
Table of Contents
Introduction
May 2024 term - Important Dates
Assessments, Evaluation and Grading
Lab Handbook:
Pass criteria and Grades
Badges - for participation in Discourse forum
Foundation level courses
1. English - I
2. Math for Electronics - I
3. Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
3.1 Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab
4. Introduction to C Programming
5. English - II
6. Introduction to the Linux Shell
7. Digital Systems
8. Electrical and Electronic Circuits
9. Electronics Lab
10. Embedded C Programming
11. Math for Electronics - II
12. Signals and Systems
13. Intro to python programming
Annexure I
Term Calendar
Assignment Dates
Quizzes, OPPEs, NPPEs and Exam Dates

Introduction
This document provides detailed information about evaluation and grading of courses of BS in
Electronic Systems Degree program from IIT Madras. The information includes details of each
course such as number of credits, eligibility to write the final exam, eligibility to obtain the final
course grade, parameters considered for calculating final score and calculation of final score.
The BS in Electronic Systems Degree program comprises three levels - Foundation, Diploma
and BS Degree. The Foundation and Diploma level consists of ten courses each and BS
Degree level consists of 12 courses. The BS program has 142 credits in total with 44 credits in
Foundation, 42 credits in Diploma and 56 credits in Degree level.
Each course has multiple types of assessments - online weekly assignments, quizzes and an
end term (semester) exam. The weekly assignments are generally non-proctored whereas
quizzes and end term exams are proctored and are conducted at designated exam centres.

Students are advised to go through this grading document carefully. Students can contact the
support team for any queries related to this document.

May 2024
term Important
Dates
​

Quizzes
in
Centres:
​

Qui
z 1:
Jul
y 7,
20
24

​

Qui
z 2:
Au
gus
t 4,

20
24
​

End Term
(Sem)
Exam:
September
1, 2024

Assessments, Evaluation and Grading
Evaluation and grading varies from course to course. Generally, most courses have the
following types of assessments: weekly assignments, proctored quizzes, an in-person end term
(sem) exam, online proctored programming exam, and lab work. However, some courses may
have special types of assessments depending on the type of the course. Please note that the
assessments, evaluation and grading varies from course to course.
Details of the types of assessments are mentioned below:
​

Online assignments:
​ A 12 week course will have one or more weekly assignments to be submitted
online within the due date specified.
​ Generally, the average score of the best five out of the first nine weekly
assignments given during the course run should be >= 40/100 to be eligible
to write the final exam and get the hall ticket for the same.
​ Score in any unattempted assignment will be counted as 0.
​ Depending on the course, the average of weekly assignment scores may
contribute to the total course score and course grade.

​

Two proctored Quizzes
​
​
​

Two quizzes will be conducted after the end of Weeks 4 and 8 based on the
content of Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively.
These quizzes must be attempted in person in the city chosen
There will be a single session exam with 4 hours to attempt four subjects, 3
hours to attempt three subjects and 2 hours to attempt one or two subjects.

​
​
​
​
​
​

​
​

​

At the end of a semester, there will be a final exam of 1.5 hours duration for
each course. (This will ensure exams can be conducted only on Sundays and
exams for four courses completed in two sessions of 3 hours each throughout
the program.)
There will be an eligibility criteria defined for every course to obtain the hall
ticket for the final exam, announced at the beginning of the semester.
If the above eligibility is not satisfied, students will not be allowed to write the
Semester exam and will have to repeat the course.

In person Lab Sessions in IIT Madras
​

​

​

The Qualifier score will be counted as Quiz 1 score for the courses
registered immediately after the qualifier exam in the same semester.
The score of a quiz not attempted will be taken as 0. No make-up quiz will
be provided.
Attending one of the two quizzes will be a mandatory condition to be eligible
to appear for the final exam, unless stated otherwise.
These Quizzes are conducted in designated exam centers where students
have to physically go and attend.
Final exam at the end of the course

Some of the courses are accompanied by lab sessions to be done at home
with the use of electronic kits as suggested. The cost of the kit is not included
in the fee structure given in this document.
It is mandatory that students travel to IIT Madras campus to demonstrate the
lab experiments specified and complete the lab exams in person at the
campus. These are planned currently in the months of May-July and
November-January and may change based on other constraints. The
tentative duration for the in person component at IIT Madras is expected to
be one week per lab course every semester.

Online Proctored Programming Exams (OPPE)
​

​

OPPEs are conducted for certain programming courses. Students can take
the exam from their home, unless mentioned otherwise.
​ The duration and marks of OPPE varies from course to course. Generally it is
a 1.5 or 2 hour exam.
Course Participation Marks
​

Course Participation Marks are for encouraging and incentivising the students
to participate more in the activities of the course. These marks will be added

​

​

​

​

ONLY for the students who pass the course and will only impact the course
grade, and not the pass criteria.
Criteria for course participation marks: Marks will be applicable based on
availability of practice/mock assignments in the course. It can vary from
course to course and can be from 0-5.
Based on practice assignments - 5 marks - applicable to only Foundation &
Diploma courses (wherever practice assignments are provided). A course
may not have participation marks.
If the average of the marks obtained in all the practice assignments (including
programming) until week 8 AND mock tests conducted before Quiz 1 & Quiz
2 >= 40/100, students will get 5 marks.
Note: If the course is not having Practice or Mock Assignments, then there
will be no Course Participation marks will be given.

Lab Handbook:
Kindly look into the lab handbook, which has been attached here Lab Handbook

Pass criteria and Grades
Grades:
Total Course Score (T) considers all assessment components in every course as defined in the
Grading document of that semester. A candidate is deemed to have passed a course if Total
Course Score (T) >= 40/100. This criteria is the same for all learners in the course. An absolute
grading system, as described in the following table, will be followed:
Co
ndi
tio
n
sat
isfi

S
t
a
t
s

L
e
t
t
e
r

ed
by
‘T’
Tot
al
Co
urs
e
Sc
ore
(O
ut
Of
10
0)
(T
≥
90)

G
r
a
d
e

S
a
s
s

(90
>T
≥
80)

A
a
s
s

(80
>T
≥
70)

a
s
s

B

(70
>T
≥
60)

a
s
s

(60
>T
≥
50)

a
s
s

(50
>T
>=
40)

a
s
s

(T
<
40)

C

D

E

U
a
i
l

Av
era
ge
of
the
We
ekl
y
ass
ign
me
nt
sco
re
<4
0/1
00
or
0
qui
zze
s
att
en
de
d(No
t
elig
ible
to
writ
e
the
fina
l
exa
m)

a
i
l

W
A
/
W
Q

To summarize, S,A,B,C,D,E - Pass grade; U- Fail grade, WA/WQ - Learner was not eligible to
attempt the end term exam
Supplementary Exam
​ If student is absent in the End Term Exam (ET) alone, a supplementary exam is
planned to be conducted at IIT Madras
​ Those who want to take supplementary exam should come to IIT Madras campus
Note: This supplementary is not finalized. Students will be communicated about the details of
the supplementary exam only if it is finalized.
I grade:
In I grade - there are three types:

​

If you are absent for ET alone with all other assessment components completed
(quizzes, OPPEs, project, lab, weekly assignments) - grade will be pushed as I.
Options: You can register to take up the ET exam alone in the subsequent term. OPPE
and quizzes will not be scheduled for you. All other marks for Final course score will be
taken from the previous run.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE but wrote the ET exam and crossed the cutoff for
T as given in the course grading policy, grade = I_OP.
You can register to do the OPPE alone whereby if the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You can attempt
the OPPE alone. All other mark components of FInal course score will be taken from the
previous run. ET and quizzes will not be scheduled for you.
​ If you have failed in the OPPE and absent for ET, then grade = I_BOTH
You can register for ET and OPPEs alone. If the course has one OPPE, that will be
scheduled. If the course has 2 OPPEs, both will be scheduled for you. You will attempt
the ET and OPPEs. Quiz and GAA and other components will be taken from the
previous run and not scheduled.
In all the above cases, you can also choose to repeat the entire course and not just do the
ET/OPPE alone if you want to reattempt all assessment components.
Summary Table for course grading
Average of
Graded
assignment
score

Attendance
in Quizzes
(as per
course
eligibility)

ET

T

Grade

< 40

Not
attended

-

>= 40

Attended

Present

>=40

>= 40

Attended

Absent

-

Result

Condition for
course reg

-

WA

Fail

Repeat the
entire course

Depends
on the
marks

Pass

I

Fail

Option 1:
Attend
makeup exam
at IIT Madras
(*YTF)
OR
Option 2:
Complete ET
alone in the
next term. GA
and quiz
marks will be
carried over
OR
Option 3:
Repeat the
entire course

>= 40

Not
attended

-

-

WQ

Fail

Repeat the
entire course

>= 40

Attended

Present

< 40

U

Fail

Appear for the
Supplementar
y exam OR
Repeat the
entire course

* Make up exam and Supplementary exam are to be finalized
Summary Table for Lab and OPPE related course

1

2

Lab

OPE1/
OPE2

ET

T

Absen
t

Absent

Absen
t

-

Absen
t

Absent

3

4

5

Prese
nt

Absent

Prese
nt

Possibilitie
Grade
s for
student
U

Repeat the
course.

>=3
5

I_LOP

Complete
OPE and Lab
in next term;
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
GA, quiz and
ET marks will
be carried
over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

<35

U

Repeat the
entire course

I_OP

Complete
OPE alone in
next term;
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
GA, quiz and
ET marks will
be carried
over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

U

Repeat the
entire course

>=4
Prese 0
nt

<40

6

Absen
t

Present
score<
40/100
(Fail)

Absen
t

4

Prese
5
nt

6

<40

U

Repeat the
entire course

-

U

Repeat the
entire course

>=4
0

I_OP

Complete
OPE alone in
next term,
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
GA, quiz and
ET marks will
be carried
over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

<40

U

Repeat the
entire course

>=4
Prese 0
nt

7

8

I_LOP

Complete
Lab and OPE
in next term,
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
GA, quiz and
ET marks will
be carried
over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

Prese
nt

Present
score<
40/100
(Fail)

Absen
t

-

Complete ET
and OPE in
next term,
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
I_BOTH
GA and quiz
marks will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

7

Absen
t

Present
Score >
40/100

8

9

Absen
t

9
Prese
nt

Present
Score >
40/100

Present
Score >
40/100

1
0

1 Prese
1
nt

Absent

Prese >=4
nt
0

I_L

Complete
Lab alone in
next term
Or
Repeat the
entire course

Prese
<40
nt

U

Repeat the
entire course

-

Complete
Lab and ET
in next term;
OPPE will
NOT be
scheduled.
I_L_ET GA, quiz and
OPPE marks
will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

-

I

Complete ET
alone in next
term;
OPPE will
NOT be
scheduled.
GA, quiz and
OPPE marks
will be
carried over
OR
Repeat the
entire course

Prese
nt

Actual
Grade

Grade as per
the Total
score T

Absen
t

Repeat OPPE
and End
Term Exam
in next term
Both OPPEs
will be
scheduled.
I_OPET
GA, quiz and
ET marks will
be carried
over
or
Repeat Entire
course

Absen
t

Absen
t

-

Course Fee
Repeating one component [OPPE/Lab/EndTerm] then the
course fee will be Rs.2000
Repeating two components
[OPPE+Lab,OPPE+EndTerm,Lab+EndTerm] then the course
fee will be Rs.4000
Full course fee is applicable for Repeating the entire course

​
​
​

OPPE will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating ET
alone.
ET will not be applicable for the students who registered for repeating OPPE
alone.
Students who registered for repeating OPPE & ET will have to appear for
OPPE1, OPPE2 & ET.

Regis
tered
Categ
ory

OPP
E

ET
alone

No
OPP
E will
be
cond
ucted

OPPE
alone

Both
OPP
E will
be
cond
ucted

ET +
OPPE

Both
OPP
E
and
ET
will
be
cond
ucted

Badges - for participation in Discourse forum
We will be looking at active engagement with Discourse in a term and provide badges for
participation.
Badges will be given based on the number of hours a student spends on Discourse. A
student is expected to spend a minimum of 1 hour per week per course in Discourse reading
posts.

Student will get the following badges:
​ Read time of up to four hours per course in a term: Badge 1
​ Read time of up to eight hours per course in a term: Badge 2
​ Read time of up to twelve hours per course or more: Badge 3
(Applicable only after you get the BS student roll number)

Foundation level courses
The following are the Foundation level courses:
Seme
ster

Level

Course
Title

Cre
dits

1

Founda
tion

English I

4

1

Founda
tion

Mathema
tics for
Electroni
cs I

4

Founda
tion

Electroni
c System
Thinking
and
Circuits

4

1

Founda
tion

Electroni
c System
Thinking
and
Circuits
Lab

1

1

Founda
tion

Introducti
on to C
Program
ming

2+3

2

Founda
tion

English II

4

1

2

Founda
tion

Introducti
on to the
Linux
Shell

5

2

Founda
tion

Digital
Systems

4

2

Founda
tion

Electrical
and
Electroni
c Circuits

4

2

Founda
tion

Electroni
cs Lab

3

3

Founda
tion

Embedde
dC
Program
ming

4+2

3

Diplom
a

Math for
Electroni
cs II

4

3

Diplom
a

Signals
and
Systems

4+1

3

Diplom
a

Python
program
ming

5

1. English - I
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:

End term: September 1, 2024

​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Parameters for Final course Score calculation:
Final course Score calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

2. Math for Electronics - I
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
AND Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

3. Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits

Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

3.1 Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits Lab
In-campus Lab work: Students are required to visit IIT Madras for lab work.
Prerequisites: None

Credits: One

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the in-campus practical lab activity
Final course Score T calculation: 1(Attendance) * ((0.5*experiment )+(0.5 * Report))

4. Introduction to C Programming
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024
OPPE 1: July 21, 2024

Quiz 2: No Quiz-2

End term: September 1, 2024

OPPE 2: Aug 18, 2024 & Aug 25, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
For Quiz 1, OPPE 1, OPPE 2 and End Term exam dates please refer to Annexure
(OPPE 1 and OPPE 2: Students will be allocated one of the two slots on each date: YTD)
​ Eligibility for OPPE 1: OPPE 1 will be scheduled for ALL who enrolled to the
course
​ Eligibility for OPPE 2: We will be having a Timed Assignment (LAB Assignment)
(LAB Assignment) every week that is open three days in a week. Students have
to mandatorily attempt this assignment in at least one of the 3 slots

If the Average of the scores of the best 3 out of the first 5 Timed Assignment (LAB
Assignment) (LAB Assignment)s >= 40/100, then we will schedule the OPPE2 for you. If
you do not satisfy this, we will not schedule OPPE2 for you.
Prerequisites: None
Credits: Five
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignments
(objective and programming) scores >= 40/100
AND
​ Attendance in one of the two OPPEs (OPPE1, OPPE2)
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade:
The conditions below should be satisfied.
​
​

Attending the end term exam AND
Score in one of the two programming exams (OPPE1, OPPE2) should be >=
40/100 - Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming quizzes

Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of all weekly graded
assignments
WTA = Average of best 4 out of the first 6 Timed Assignment (LAB
Assignment) (LAB Assignment) scores
Qz1 = score in Quiz 1 (0, if not attempted) - in center
OPPE1 = score in OPPE 1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1
OPPE2 = score in OPPE 2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.10GAA + 0.2Qz1 + 0.40F + max(0.15 OPPE1 + 0.15 OPPE2, 0.20
max(OPPE1,OPPE2)) + 0.15 WTA (capped to 100)
​
​
​
​

​

Maximum marks a student can get is 115 marks if both OPPEs are attended.
Else if one oppe is attended, evaluation is out of 105 marks
Proctored in person - 60 marks (Quiz+Final)
Proctored online - 30 or 20 marks (OPPE)
Non proctored timed - 15 marks (WTA - starts from week 5, with each week
having 3 or 4 programs). Score in each week will be calculated as the average of
marks obtained in all timed programming assignments given that week.
Non proctored non-timed - 10 marks (GAA)

5. English - II
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.

End term: September 1, 2024

Prerequisites: English I
Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

6. Introduction to the Linux Shell
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024
OPPE 1: July 21, 2024

Quiz 2: No Quiz-2
End term: September 1, 2024
OPPE 2: Aug 18, 2024 & Aug 25, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Labs: June 15, June 29, July 13, July 27 and August 10 2024
OPPE and NPPE Dates and Timings has been updated in Annexures
Corequisites: Introduction to C Programming

Credits: Five

Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and
programming) scores >= 40/100 and AND

​

Attending the OPPE

Eligibility to get the course grade:
​

Attending the end semester exam

​

Attending the programming exam, with a score >= 40/100

​

Attending the lab activities

​

Attendance in 3 out of 5 labs

​

Completing at least 40 % of tasks in all the labs.”Best 3 out of 5 will be
considered for grading.”

​

The deadline for the first 3 labs is 28th July 2024, and the next 2 labs is 21th
August 2024

GAA1 = Average of score in Best 9 out of all weekly graded assignments
GAA2 = Score in NPPE
Qz1[Week 1-4] = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
OPE1[Week 1-4] = Score in online remote proctored programming exam
​

One additional attempt will be provided only if score < 40 in first attempt

F = score in End Term exam
VMT = score in VM Tasks (It has to be completed in the virtual machine provided)
Virtual Machine Tasks are the 10 tasks available in the course VM shared, named from
assignment_1 to assignment_10.

Final course score:
PART_A = 0.06 GAA1 + 0.04 GAA2 + 0.2 Qz1 + 0.3 F
PART_B = 0.1 VMT + 0.5 LAB + 0.5 OPPE (capped to 100)
Final course score T = 0.6 PART_A + 0.4 PART_B

7. Digital Systems
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits
Eligibility to write the final exam:

Credits: Four

​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
Lab = score based on demonstration of lab work (if applicable)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

8. Electrical and Electronic Circuits
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Math for Electronics I and Electronic Systems Thinking and Circuits

Credits: Four
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
Lab = score based on demonstration of lab work, if applicable
F = score in final exam

T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

9. Electronics Lab
In-campus Lab work: Students are required to visit IIT Madras for lab work.
Corequisites: Electrical & Electronic Circuits and Digital Systems
Credits: Three
WE: Weekly Experiment submission
ID: In-person Demonstration during lab at IIT Madras
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade:
​
​

Minimum 40% in WE
Attend the in-person lab at IIT Madras

The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
T = 0.4 (WE) + 0.6 (ID)

10. Embedded C Programming
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Prerequisites: Introduction to C Programming Corequisites: Introduction to the Linux Shell
Credits: Six

Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
AND
​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100
Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.2GAA + max ((0.5F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2)), (0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.2Qz2))

11. Math for Electronics - II
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Math for Electronics I
Eligibility to write the final exam:
​
​

Credits: Four

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment scores >=
40/100
AND Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly graded
assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

12. Signals and Systems
Quiz 1: July 7, 2024

Quiz 2: August 4, 2024

End term: September 1, 2024

Above to be attended in person at designated centers.
Prerequisites: Electrical and Electronic Circuits
Eligibility to write the final exam:

Credits: Four

​

Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weeks of weekly assignment
scores >= 40/100

​

Attendance in one of the 2 quizzes

AND
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Attending the end term exam
Final course Score T calculation:
The calculation of Final course Score T for eligible students is as follows:
​
​
​
​

GAA = Average score in Best 10 assignments out of first 11 weekly
graded assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted)
Qz2 = score in Quiz II (0, if not attempted)
F = score in final exam

Formula:
T = 0.1GAA + max (0.6F + 0.2max(Qz1, Qz2), 0.4F + 0.2Qz1 + 0.3Qz2)

13. Intro to python programming
Quiz 1: July 7th, 2024

No Quiz2 for this course.

End term: Sep 1st 2024

OPPE1: Sunday, July 21, 2024 (08:00 to 09:30 AM, 10:30 to 12:00 PM, 04:30 to 06:00 PM)
OPPE2: Sunday, August 25, 2024 (10:00 AM - 11:30 AM, 01:30 PM - 03:00 PM, 04:30 PM - 06:00 PM)
For Both OPPE1 & OPPE2, out of the 3 slots, one will be allocated from IITM. Please keep
yourself free on the dates given.
OPPE 1 will be scheduled for ALL who enrolled to the course
Eligibility to appear for the OPPE 2:
If the Average of the scores of the best 5 out of the first 6 Weekly programming assignments
(GrPA) >= 40/100

AND
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
then we will schedule the OPPE2 for you. If you do not satisfy this, we will not schedule OPPE2
for you.
Eligibility to appear for the final exam is as follows:
Average of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assessments (objective and programming) scores
>= 40/100
Eligibility to obtain the final course grade: Both the conditions below should be satisfied.
​ Attending the end term exam AND
​ Minimum score to be obtained in one of the programming exams (OPPE1,
OPPE2) should be >= 40/100 The calculation of Final course Score for eligible students is as follows:
GAA1 = Average score in Best 10 objective assignments out of First 11 graded objective
assignments
GAA2 = Average score in Best 10 programming assignments out of First 11 graded
programming assignments
Qz1 = score in Quiz I (0, if not attempted) - in center
PE1 = score in OPPE1 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 1
PE2 = score in OPPE2 (0, if not attempted) - programming exam 2
F = score in final exam
T = 0.1 GAA1 (objective) + 0.1GAA2 (programming) + 0.1Qz1+ 0.4F+ 0.25 max(PE1, PE2) +
0.15 min(PE1, PE2) — capped to 100

Annexure I
Term Calendar
May 2024 Calendar
For
Qualifier
Student

Start Date End Date

Qualifier
Registration
Form

Monday,
Feb 26
2024

Sunday,
May 26,
2024

Course and
Program
Orientation

Monday,
May 20,
2024

Thursday,
May 30,
2024

Qualifier
Exam

Sunday,
July 7,
2024

Publishing
Result for
Qualifier
Exam

Friday, July
12, 2024

QF Course
Registration
and
Reattempt
Qualifier
Window

Wednesday, Thursday,
July 17,
July 18,
2024
2024

Reattempt
Qualifier
Exam

Sunday,
August 4,
2024

Publishing
Wednesday,
Result Qual _ August 14,
Reattempt
2024

For Term
Students

Start Date End Date

Course
Registration
Window

Wednesday, Thursday,
May 15,
May 16,
2024
2024

Drop Course Friday,
form
June 21,
Window
2024

Term Start

Friday,
May 31,
2024

Sunday,
June 23,
2024

Quiz 1

Sunday,
July 7,
2024

Publishing
results for
Quiz 1

Monday,
July 15,
2024

Programming Sunday,
Quiz 1 (Day July 21,
1)
2024

Sunday,
July 21,
2024

OPPE1
Result
Release

Thursday,
July 25,
2024

Tuesday,
July 30,
2024

Quiz 2

Sunday,
August 4,
2024

Publishing
results for
Quiz 2

Monday,
August 12,
2024

Programming Sunday,
Quiz 2 (Day August 18,
1)
2024
Programming Sunday,
Quiz 2 (Day August 25,
2)
2024
OPPE2
Result
Release

Thursday, Tuesday,
August 22, August
2024
27, 2024

End Term

Sunday,
September
1, 2024

Publishing
Result for
End Term

Monday,
Saturday,
September September
9, 2024
14, 2024

Quiz
1

Quiz
2

End OPPE
term 1
exam

OPPE
2 Day
1

OPPE
2 Day2

7 July
4
1 Sep
July 21
2024,
August 2024,
2024
Sunday 2024,
Sunday
Sunday
2pm-6
pm*

2pm-6
pm*

9am-1
2pm,
2pm-5
pm

In
centers

In
centers

In
centers

Online
remote
proctored

Aug 18
2024

Aug 25
2024

Online
remote
proctored

Online
remote
proctored

(If required and, we will do a morning session for the quiz)

Assignment Dates
Content Assignmen Assignmen
Release t deadlines t deadlines
Dates Foundation Diploma
Friday, Wednesday,
Week May 31,
June 12,
1
2024
2024

Sunday,
June 16,
2024

Friday, Wednesday,
Week June 7,
June 19,
2
2024
2024

Sunday,
June 16,
2024

Friday,
June Wednesday,
Week
14,
June 26,
3
2024
2024

Sunday,
June 23,
2024

Friday,
June
Week
21,
Wednesday,
4
2024 July 3, 2024

Sunday,
June 30,
2024

Friday,
June
Week
28,
Sunday, July Sunday, July
5
2024
14, 2024
14, 2024
Friday, Wednesday,
Week July 5,
July 17,
6
2024
2024

Monday,
July 22,
2024

Friday, Wednesday,
Week July 12,
July 24,
Sunday, July
7
2024
2024
28, 2024
Friday, Wednesday,
Week July 19,
July 31,
Sunday, July
8
2024
2024
28, 2024
Friday,
Week July 26,
9
2024

Sunday,
August 11,
2024

Sunday,
August 11,
2024

Friday, Wednesday,
Week August August 21,
10 2, 2024
2024

Tuesday,
August 20,
2024

Friday, Wednesday,
Week August August 21,
11 9, 2024
2024

Tuesday,
August 20,
2024

Friday, Wednesday, Wednesday,
Week August August 28, August 28,
12 9, 2024
2024
2024

Quizzes, OPPEs, NPPEs and Exam Dates
​ Quizzes in Centres: July 7, 2024 and August 4, 2024: 2 pm-6 pm
(If required we might do a morning session for the quiz)
​
​
​
​
​

End Term Exam: September 1, 2024 9 am-12 noon & 2 pm-5 pm
OPPE 1: July 21st 2024
OPPE 2: August 18th & August 25th 2024
NPPE1: [Week 1-5]:July 17th 2024
NPPE2: [Week 1-7]: August 16th 2024

Note: The dates mentioned in this document might change and the same will be
communicated to students if and when there are changes

1. What is "BS in Data Science & Applications"?
- "BS in Data Science & Applications" is a program offered by IIT Madras. It focuses on
teaching people about data science, which involves collecting, analyzing, and interpreting large
sets of data to make informed decisions.
2. What is IIT Madras?
- IIT Madras stands for the Indian Institute of Technology Madras. It's a prestigious institution
in India known for its high-quality education in science, engineering, and technology.

3. What does it mean that the course contents are delivered online?
- "Delivered online" means that the course material, like lectures, assignments, and readings,
are accessible over the internet. Students can study these materials from anywhere with an
internet connection.
4. Why do learners have to attend monthly quizzes and final exams in person?
- Learners have to attend quizzes and exams in person to ensure fairness and prevent
cheating. It also allows instructors to monitor students' progress and provide support if needed.
5. What are the different certificates and degrees that learners can earn in this program?
- Depending on the number of courses completed, learners can earn different certificates and
degrees. These include a Foundation level certificate, a Diploma in Programming, a Diploma in
Data Science, a BSc degree in Programming and Data Science, or a BS degree in Data
Science and Applications.
6. What is a "Foundation level certificate"?
- A "Foundation level certificate" is awarded to learners who complete a certain set of
introductory courses. It demonstrates basic understanding and knowledge in the field.
7. What is a "Diploma in Programming"?
- A "Diploma in Programming" is a credential indicating proficiency in computer programming
languages and techniques.
8. What is a "Diploma in Data Science"?
- A "Diploma in Data Science" is a credential indicating proficiency in data analysis, machine
learning, and other data science techniques.
9. Can someone earn both diplomas?
- Yes, learners can earn both diplomas if they complete the required courses for each.
10. What is a "BSc degree"?
- A "BSc degree" stands for Bachelor of Science degree. It is a higher education qualification
awarded upon completion of an undergraduate program in a scientific field.
11. Can you explain what "BS degree in Data Science and Applications" means?
- A "BS degree in Data Science and Applications" is a Bachelor of Science degree focused
specifically on data science. It signifies that the recipient has completed a comprehensive
program covering various aspects of data science and its applications in real-world scenarios.

1. **Who teaches the courses in the program?**
- The courses in the program are taught by faculty from IIT Madras, other reputed institutes,
as well as experts from the industry.

2. **How does the admission process in this program differ from other competitive exams?**
- Unlike many competitive admission exams, which admit a limited number of learners based
on their performance relative to others, this program has specific qualifying criteria, and a
significantly large number of learners can enter.
3. **Can you join this program regardless of your educational background?**
- Yes, learners from any background, including engineering, sciences, humanities, arts,
medicine, law, etc., can attempt and join this program.
4. **Are there any restrictions based on age or location for joining this program?**
- There are no limitations based on the age of the learner or their geographical location for
joining this program.
**How many entry and exit points does the program have?**
- There are two entry and four exit points in the program.
2. **What are the options for learners upon exiting the program?**
- Learners can exit with either course certificates, diplomas, or degrees.
3. **Can learners choose their own pace of study?**
- Yes, learners can choose their pace of study every term.
4. **What is the requirement for learners in terms of attending exams?**
- Learners need to travel to exam centers for exams each term.
5. **Is admission required for this program?**
- No, this program is not based on an admission process. Qualified learners can attempt
respective stages of the program.
6. **What happens after each stage of the program?**
- After each stage of the program, learners receive the certificate corresponding to that stage
alone.
7. **Can you explain how learners progress through the program to obtain diplomas or
degrees?**
- Learners progress through the program by completing the courses prescribed and satisfying
any other mandatory criteria to accrue the requisite number of credits for diplomas or degrees.
8. **Does admission to any level guarantee obtaining a diploma or degree?**
- No, admission to any level does not automatically entitle the learner to exit the program with
a diploma or degree.
1. **What is the definition of credit in the program?**

- Credits are based on the UGC system, where 14 hours of learner engagement equals 1
credit. In this program, 1 credit mentioned is equivalent to 3 credits in the current IITM campus
Credit system.
2. **How many credits are required to graduate with the BSc degree and the BS degree?**
- The BSc degree requires 114 credits, while the BS degree requires 142 credits.
3. **What courses are included in Level 1: The Foundation level, and how many credits does it
comprise?**
- The Foundation level comprises 8 courses: English 1, English 2, Mathematics 1,
Mathematics 2, Statistics 1, Statistics 2, Computational Thinking, and Introduction to Python. It
comprises 32 credits.
4. **What are the components of Level 2: Diploma level, and how many credits does it
comprise?**
- The Diploma level includes 2 Diplomas: Diploma in Programming and Diploma in Data
Science. Each diploma comprises 6 courses (23 credits) and 2 project courses (4 credits),
totaling 54 credits.
5. **Can you provide details about the Diploma in Programming and the Diploma in Data
Science?**
- The Diploma in Programming includes courses like Database Management Systems,
Programming Data Structures and Algorithms using Python, Java Programming, etc. The
Diploma in Data Science includes courses like Machine Learning Foundations, Business Data
Management, Tools in Data Science, etc.
6. **What happens if a student falls short of the required credits in the Diploma level?**
- Students falling short of the 54 credits in the Diploma level may need to do additional
courses in the BSc level to make up for the deficit in credits.
7. **What are the courses included in Level 3: BSc Degree level, and how many credits does it
comprise?**
- The BSc Degree level comprises a total of 28 credits, including mandatory core pairs and a
mandatory course on Strategies for Professional Growth.
8. **Are there any mandatory courses at the BSc Degree level?**
- Yes, there are mandatory core pairs and a mandatory course on Strategies for Professional
Growth at the BSc Degree level.
9. **What are the courses included in Level 4: BS Degree level, and how many credits does it
comprise?**
- Level 4 comprises a total of 28 credits, with options for Apprenticeship and mandatory
courses in programming and data science streams.

10. **Can you explain the option of Apprenticeship and how many credits can be earned from
it?**
- Apprenticeship is optional and split into two courses: one for a 4-month internship and
another for a term of apprenticeship continued from months 5-8. One can earn 0/4/8/12 credits
from Apprenticeship.

Admission to the programme

Regular Entry into Foundation level
1. **How can applicants enter the Foundation level of the program?**
- Applicants can enter the Foundation level by passing the Qualifier exam.
2. **What are the possible exits from the Foundation level?**
- Exits from the Foundation level include receiving a Foundation course certificate, earning a
Diploma in Programming/Data Science or both, obtaining a BSc Degree in Programming and
Data Science from IIT Madras, or achieving a BS in Data Science and Applications from IIT
Madras.
3. **What are the eligibility criteria to apply for the Qualifier Exam?**
- Minimum eligibility requires having studied Mathematics and English in Class 10.
4. **Can you explain who can apply for the Qualifier Exam?**
- Anyone who has passed Class 12 or equivalent can apply, regardless of age or academic
background. School students who have appeared for their Class 11 final exams can also apply.
5. **What is the fee for the Qualifier exam, and are there any waivers available?**
- The fee for the Qualifier exam is currently set at Rs 3000/- for the General category, with
waivers available for candidates from the SC/ST and PwD backgrounds with 40% disability.
6. **Is the Qualifier exam fee refundable?**
- No, the fee for the Qualifier exam will not be refunded once paid.
7. **What is the preparation process for the Qualifier exam?**

- All regular entry applicants must go through a 4-week Qualifier Process to earn admission to
the Foundation Level. Content for four Foundation level courses will be provided week by week,
including videos, tutorials, practice/graded assignments, and text transcripts.
8. **How is eligibility to appear for the Qualifier exam determined?**
- Eligibility is determined based on the average assignment scores in each course. Only those
who meet the minimum required average assignment scores in all four courses will be allowed
to appear for the Qualifier Exam.
9. **What is the minimum average assignment score required for different categories of
learners?**
- The minimum average assignment score required varies for different categories of learners,
ranging from 30% to 40%.
10. **Are there any relaxations in pass criteria for the qualifier process?**
- Yes, relaxations in pass criteria are applicable only for the qualifier process for various
categories of learners. There will be no relaxations in terms of grades/pass criteria once
registered into the program.
11. How long is the Qualifier Process?
- The Qualifier Process lasts for 4 weeks.
12. What content is provided during the Qualifier Process?
- During the Qualifier Process, content for four Foundation level courses is provided, including
videos, tutorials, practice/graded assignments, and text transcripts.
13. What is the format of the Qualifier exam?
- The Qualifier exam is conducted at the end of the 4-week Qualifier Process and is based on
the content covered during that time.
14. How are assignments graded during the Qualifier Process?
- Assignments are graded out of 100, and the average of the best two out of the three
assignments is calculated for each subject.
15. Can you explain the pass criteria for different categories of learners during the Qualifier
Process?
- The pass criteria vary for different categories of learners, with minimum average assignment
scores required ranging from 30% to 40%.
16. What happens if a student does not meet the minimum average assignment score required
for all four courses?
- Students must meet the minimum average assignment score in all four courses to be
allowed to appear for the Qualifier Exam. If they do not meet this requirement, they may not be
eligible to proceed further in the program.

17. Are there any exceptions to the pass criteria once a student is registered in the program?
- No, there are no exceptions to the pass criteria once a student is registered in the program.
The relaxed pass criteria apply only for the Qualifier Process.

18. How can students access the week 1 content for the Qualifier Process?
- Week 1 content for the Qualifier Process is available for all candidates to sample on the
program website when they fill out the Qualifier exam form.
19. Can students access the Qualifier exam form and other relevant information on the program
website?
- Yes, students can access the Qualifier exam form and other relevant information on the
program website: study.iitm.ac.in/ds.
20. Is there any additional eligibility required to apply for the Qualifier process or join the
foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam?
- No, there is no additional eligibility required to apply for the Qualifier process or join the
foundational level courses after clearing the qualifying exam.

21. What is the purpose of the Qualifier exam?
- The Qualifier exam serves as a gateway for entry into the Foundation level of the program.
22. Can students access the content for all four Foundation level courses during the Qualifier
Process?
- Yes, students can access the content for all four Foundation level courses during the
Qualifier Process.
23. Are there any prerequisites for applying to the Qualifier Exam?
- The only prerequisites are having studied Mathematics and English in Class 10.
24. How is the Qualifier exam fee structured for different categories of learners?
- The Qualifier exam fee is currently set at Rs 3000/- for the General category, with waivers
available for candidates from the SC/ST and PwD backgrounds with 40% disability.
25. Can students from different educational backgrounds apply for the Qualifier exam?
- Yes, students from various educational backgrounds are eligible to apply for the Qualifier
exam.
26. What is the significance of the four Foundation level courses?
- The Foundation level courses provide the basics required to take up the Diploma level of
Programming & Data Science courses.

27. Are students allowed to resubmit assignments during the Qualifier Process?
- There is no mention of resubmission of assignments during the Qualifier Process. Typically,
students submit assignments once, and the average of the best two out of the three
assignments is considered.
28. How are students notified about the release of content during the Qualifier Process?
- Content release during the Qualifier Process is announced on the program portal, and
students receive email alerts.
29. Can students access the week 1 content before filling out the Qualifier exam form?
- Yes, students can access the week 1 content before filling out the Qualifier exam form on the
program website.
30. Is there a deadline for submitting assignments during the Qualifier Process?
- While not explicitly mentioned, it's implied that assignments must be submitted weekly during
the Qualifier Process.
31. How are hall tickets for the Qualifier Exam distributed?
- Hall tickets are released only for candidates who become eligible to take the in-person
proctored Qualifier Exam.
32. What are the criteria for passing the qualifier exam?
- To pass the qualifier exam, learners must obtain marks equal to or above the individual
subject cut-off, and the total marks for all subjects must exceed the total cut-off.
33. How is the validity of the qualifier score determined?
- The qualifier marks are valid for the 3 terms following the qualifier exam date for learners to
register for the Foundation level. After this period, learners must retake the qualifier exam if they
wish to join the program.
34. How are candidates informed about qualifier exam results?
- Candidates who qualify receive communication via email, WhatsApp, and within their login
on the portal. An admission letter is also generated for each qualified candidate.
35. Is there an opportunity for a second attempt at the qualifier exam?
- Yes, candidates who were absent or failed in the first attempt have the option for a second
attempt. The re-attempt application opens immediately after qualifier results are announced.
36. What are the options for candidates who did not become eligible for the qualifier exam?
- Candidates who did not become eligible for the qualifier exam can attempt again in
subsequent terms by paying the full fees. They must redo the 4 weeks of coursework and
weekly graded assignments.
37. What are the options to register for courses once qualified?

- Candidates who qualify in the first attempt within a term can register for courses and
continue completing them in the same term or in the next 2 terms until the qualifier score is
valid. Candidates who qualify in the second attempt within a term can only register from the
subsequent term until the qualifier score is valid.
38. How are qualifier exam scores and assignment scores considered in a learner's first term
following the qualifier exam?
- In a learner’s first term immediately following the qualifier exam, the qualifier exam scores
and assignment scores in the subjects registered will be considered as Quiz 1 score and the
first 4 assignment scores of the corresponding subjects.

39. What happens if a candidate misses the qualifier exam?
- If a candidate misses the qualifier exam, they must wait for the next opportunity to attempt it.
They will not be eligible to apply again until their score is valid for the next 3 subsequent terms.
40. Can candidates request a refund of the Qualifier exam fee if they miss the exam?
- No, the fees paid to attempt the Qualifier exam will not be refunded for candidates who
missed writing the qualifier exam.
41. How many attempts are allowed for the Qualifier exam within a term?
- There are two attempts allowed within any term. Qualifier exams are conducted at the end of
4 weeks and at the end of 8 weeks.
42. Are candidates required to repeat the assignments if they are eligible for a reattempt of the
Qualifier exam within the same term?
- No, candidates eligible for a reattempt of the Qualifier exam within the same term do not
need to repeat the assignments as they have already become eligible.
43. What fees are applicable for candidates outside India applying for a reattempt of the
Qualifier exam?
- Candidates outside India must pay the full fees applicable for their category, along with an
additional exam facilitation fee.
44. Is there a limit on the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier process?
- No, there are no limits on the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier process.
Candidates can attempt again in subsequent terms as long as they pay the applicable fees.
45. Can candidates who qualify in the first attempt within a term register for courses
immediately?
- Yes, candidates who qualify in the first attempt within a term have the option to register for
courses and continue completing them in the same term.
46. What scores are considered for candidates in their first term following the qualifier exam?

- In a candidate's first term immediately following the qualifier exam, the qualifier exam scores
and assignment scores are considered as Quiz 1 scores and the first 4 assignment scores of
the corresponding subjects.
47. What is the significance of the admission letter provided to qualified candidates?
- The admission letter confirms the qualification of candidates and serves as official
documentation of their eligibility to proceed further in the program.
48. Are there any penalties for candidates who qualify but do not register for courses?
- There are no penalties for candidates who qualify but do not register for courses. They retain
their eligibility to register in subsequent terms until their qualifier score is valid.

49. How long is the validity of the qualifier score for students who have completed their Std XII?
- For students who have completed their Std XII, the validity of the qualifier score is for 3 terms
from when they pass Std XII.
50. Can candidates apply for a reattempt of the Qualifier exam if they failed in their first attempt?
- Yes, candidates who failed in their first attempt or were absent for the final exam can apply
for a reattempt of the Qualifier exam within the same term.
51. What is the fee for reattempting the Qualifier exam within the same term for different
categories of applicants?
- The fee for reattempting the Qualifier exam within the same term is ₹1500 for General
category/OBC applicants, ₹750 for SC/ST category/PwD (>= 40% disability) applicants, and
₹375 for SC/ST category applicants who are also PwD (>= 40% disability).
52. Are candidates required to redo the entire qualifier process if they did not become eligible
for the Qualifier exam?
- Yes, candidates who did not become eligible for the Qualifier exam must redo the entire
qualifier process, including the 4 weeks of coursework and weekly graded assignments.
53. What options are available for candidates who qualify in the second attempt within a term?
- Candidates who qualify in the second attempt within a term can only register for courses
from the subsequent term until the qualifier score is valid.
54. How are candidates notified about their qualifier exam results?
- Candidates are notified about their qualifier exam results through email, WhatsApp, and
within their login on the portal.
55. Can candidates who qualify in the first attempt register for courses in subsequent terms?
- Yes, candidates who qualify in the first attempt can register for courses in subsequent terms
until their qualifier score is valid.

56. What is the purpose of considering qualifier exam scores and assignment scores as Quiz 1
scores in a candidate's first term following the qualifier exam?
- Considering qualifier exam scores and assignment scores as Quiz 1 scores in a candidate's
first term helps calculate the Final score for the term.
57. Is there any difference in the registration process for candidates who qualify in their first
attempt versus those who qualify in their second attempt?
- Yes, candidates who qualify in their first attempt have more options for course registration
compared to those who qualify in their second attempt.
58. Can candidates reapply for the Qualifier exam once their score is no longer valid?
- Yes, candidates can reapply for the Qualifier exam once their score is no longer valid. They
must go through the entire qualifier process again.

Sure, let's cover as many aspects as possible:
1. **What is the purpose of the Qualifier exam?**
- The Qualifier exam serves as a gateway for entry into the Foundation level of the program.
2. **How many subjects are included in the qualifier exam?**
- The qualifier exam comprises four subjects.
3. **What is the minimum requirement for passing the qualifier exam in each course?**
- The minimum requirement for passing the qualifier exam varies depending on the category
of the learner, with percentages ranging from 30% to 40%.
4. **What is the minimum required average qualifier exam score?**
- The minimum required average qualifier exam score varies depending on the category of the
learner, with percentages ranging from 40% to 50%.
5. **How are qualifier exam marks communicated to candidates?**
- Qualifier exam marks are displayed within the candidate's login on the portal, and candidates
also receive email and WhatsApp alerts.
6. **What is the validity period of the qualifier score?**
- The qualifier score is valid for the three terms following the qualifier exam date for learners to
register for the Foundation level.
7. **What happens if a candidate's qualifier score expires?**
- If a candidate's qualifier score expires, they must retake the qualifier exam to become
eligible for the program.
8. **Is there a limit to the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier exam?**

- There is no limit to the number of times a candidate can attempt the qualifier exam.
9. **What is the fee for attempting the qualifier exam?**
- The fee for attempting the qualifier exam is currently set at Rs 3000 for the General category,
with waivers available for SC/ST and PwD candidates with 40% disability.
10. **Can candidates request a refund of the qualifier exam fee if they fail to appear for the
exam?**
- No, the qualifier exam fee is non-refundable.
11. **Is there an option for a second attempt at the qualifier exam?**
- Yes, candidates are allowed two attempts within any term, with exams conducted at the end
of 4 weeks and 8 weeks.
12. **Are candidates required to repeat the entire qualifier process if they fail in their first
attempt?**
- No, candidates who fail in their first attempt do not have to repeat the entire qualifier
process.
13. **What happens if a candidate misses the qualifier exam?**
- If a candidate misses the qualifier exam, they must wait for the next opportunity to attempt it.
14. **Can candidates outside India apply for the qualifier exam?**
- Yes, candidates outside India can apply for the qualifier exam, but they may be subject to
additional exam facilitation fees.
15. **Are there any specific eligibility criteria for applying for the qualifier exam?**
- The only specific eligibility criteria for applying for the qualifier exam is having studied
Mathematics and English in Class 10.

JEE-based Entry into Foundation Level

59. What is the JEE-based entry into the Foundation level program?
- Students who have qualified for the JEE Advanced Exams have direct entry into the
Foundation level of the program.

60. How long is the validity of JEE-based entry into the program?
- The validity of JEE-based entry is for the three terms following the release of the JEE
Advanced Eligibility list.
61. What is the process for candidates applying through the JEE-based entry?
- Candidates apply to the Qualifier process and upload valid proof of qualifying for the JEE
Advanced Exams. If the proof is valid, they are declared eligible to join the Foundation level
courses and issued an admission letter.
62. What happens if the proof submitted for JEE-based entry is found to be invalid?
- If the proof submitted is found to be invalid, the candidate will be treated as a regular entry
candidate and will have to go through the qualifier process.
63. What is Credit Clearing Capability (CCC) and how is it determined?
- CCC determines the maximum number of courses a learner is permitted to register for in a
term. It is calculated based on the average marks of courses passed in the previous terms.
64. How is CCC decided for learners?
- CCC is decided based on the learner's performance in the previous term. If a learner has
passed at least one course, CCC for the next term is calculated based on their marks. If a
learner has failed all courses or is absent for final exams, CCC for the next term may be fixed at
2 or retained from the last term, respectively.
65. What are the steps involved in course registration for students?
- Students pick the courses they want to take within the registration window, with the total
courses limited by their CCC. They also select two cities for quizzes and exams, choose
courses with completed prerequisites, and pay only for the number of credits they are signing up
for.
66. Can students choose different cities for quizzes and exams in each term?
- Yes, students can choose different cities for quizzes and exams in each term.
67. Are there restrictions on course selection across different levels of study?
- Yes, students can only sign up for courses within a particular level of study and are not
allowed to register for courses across different levels.
68. What are the eligibility criteria for admission to the Diploma and Degree levels?
- Students who successfully complete all courses in the Foundation level are eligible for
admission to the Diploma level program. Similarly, those who complete all courses in the
Foundation and diploma programs are eligible for admission to the degree level, provided they
satisfy the prescribed criteria.
69. When are learners eligible for the BSc degree?

- Learners who complete 114 credits as per the norms are eligible for the BSc degree and can
continue onto the BS level.
70. Can students from any background apply for the JEE-based entry?
- Yes, students from any background who have qualified for the JEE Advanced Exams can
apply for the JEE-based entry.
71. How does the program ensure fairness in determining CCC?
- CCC is determined based on the learner's performance in previous terms, ensuring fairness
by considering their academic progress.
72. Are there any specific requirements for students regarding city selection for exams?
- Students have the freedom to choose different cities for exams in each term, providing
flexibility in their exam scheduling.
73. What happens if a student exceeds their CCC in course registration?
- Students are limited by their CCC in course registration. Exceeding CCC may result in
registration errors or the need to drop courses.
74. Is there a provision for financial aid or scholarships for students in the program?
- The information provided does not mention any specific provisions for financial aid or
scholarships. Students are typically required to pay for courses based on the number of credits
they sign up for.
75. Can students choose courses outside their prescribed curriculum?
- Students are encouraged to follow the prescribed curriculum, but they may have some
flexibility in course selection within their level of study, provided they meet prerequisites.
76. How are students informed about their CCC for each term?
- Students are likely informed about their CCC through program communication channels,
such as email or the program portal.
77. Are there any penalties for students who fail to meet their CCC requirements?
- The provided information does not mention specific penalties for failing to meet CCC
requirements, but students may face limitations in course registration and academic progress.
78. Is there an appeals process for students dissatisfied with their CCC determination?
- The provided information does not mention an appeals process for CCC determination.
However, students may seek clarification or assistance from program administrators.
79. Can students change their course selections after registration?
- The information provided does not specify whether students can change their course
selections after registration. However, programs often have add/drop periods where students
can make changes to their schedules.

80. How are courses structured within the program?
- Courses are structured into different levels, starting from the Foundation level and
progressing to Diploma and Degree levels. Each level consists of a set of courses designed to
build upon the knowledge and skills acquired in the previous level.
81. What types of assessments are used in the program?
- Assessments in the program may include quizzes, assignments, projects, and final exams.
These assessments help evaluate students' understanding and mastery of course material.
82. Are there any prerequisites for enrolling in specific courses?
- Yes, certain courses may have prerequisites, meaning students must have completed
specific courses or demonstrated certain knowledge or skills before enrolling. Prerequisite
requirements ensure students have the necessary foundation to succeed in advanced courses.
83. How are course instructors selected within the program?
- Course instructors are likely selected based on their expertise and experience in the subject
matter. They may be faculty members from IIT Madras or other reputed institutes, as well as
industry experts with relevant experience.
84. Can students interact with instructors and peers during the program?
- Yes, students typically have opportunities to interact with instructors and peers through
online forums, discussion boards, virtual classrooms, and other collaborative platforms.
Interaction with instructors and peers enhances learning and fosters a sense of community
within the program.
85. What support services are available to students throughout the program?
- Support services may include academic advising, tutoring, technical support, counseling,
and access to learning resources such as libraries and online databases. These services aim to
support students in their academic and personal growth.
86. How is academic integrity maintained within the program?
- Academic integrity is typically maintained through clear policies and guidelines on
plagiarism, cheating, and other forms of academic misconduct. Students are expected to uphold
high standards of honesty and integrity in their academic work.
87. Are there opportunities for hands-on learning or practical experience in the program?
- Yes, certain courses or components of the program may include hands-on projects, case
studies, internships, or other experiential learning opportunities. These experiences help
students apply theoretical knowledge to real-world situations and develop practical skills.
88. How is feedback provided to students on their performance?

- Feedback may be provided through grades, comments on assignments, evaluations of
projects, and discussions with instructors. Constructive feedback helps students understand
their strengths and areas for improvement, facilitating their learning and growth.
89. Are there opportunities for students to engage in research or independent study?
- Yes, students may have opportunities to engage in research projects, independent study, or
collaborative research with faculty members or industry partners. These opportunities allow
students to explore topics of interest in depth and contribute to advancing knowledge in their
field.

Direct Entry into Diploma programme
100. What is the Direct Entry into Diploma programme pathway?
- The Direct Entry into Diploma programme pathway allows individuals with sufficient
foundational knowledge, such as working professionals or those with prior education, to enter
the Diploma level directly.
101. Who is eligible to apply for Direct Entry into the Diploma programme?
- Students who have completed two years in any undergraduate degree program are eligible
to apply for Direct Entry into the Diploma programme. They must submit their second-year
marksheet or higher as proof of eligibility.
102. What is the qualifying process for Direct Entry into the Diploma programme?
- The qualifying process involves a separate Direct Admission to Diploma (DAD) qualifier
exam for the Diploma in Programming (DP) and Diploma in Data Science (DS). Candidates
must meet the cutoff marks defined for each exam to be eligible for entry into the Diploma
programme.
103. How many attempts are candidates allowed for Direct Entry into the Diploma programme?
- There is no limit on the number of attempts for Direct Entry, but candidates are
recommended to attempt the Foundation level if they do not pass the qualifier exam.
104. What subjects are included in the DAD qualifier exam for DP and DS?
- The DAD qualifier exam for DP includes English, Aptitude, and six weeks of Mathematics 1.
The DAD qualifier exam for DS includes English, Mathematics 1, Statistics 1, and Python
programming.
105. Can students who complete the Diploma in Data Science pursue the Diploma in
Programming without taking the qualifier exam?

- Yes, students who complete the Diploma in Data Science through Direct Admission are
directly eligible to pursue the Diploma in Programming without taking the qualifier exam for DP.
106. What are the fees for the DAD qualifier exam, and what are the cutoff marks required for
each subject?
- The fees for the DAD qualifier exam vary based on the category of the candidate. The cutoff
marks required for each subject also vary depending on the category. For example, for
GEN/OBC-CL candidates, the fee is Rs 6000, and the cutoff is 40% (50/100 marks).

107. What is the primary target audience for the Direct Entry into the Diploma program?
- The Direct Entry into the Diploma program primarily targets working professionals or learners
who already possess the foundational knowledge taught in the first year of the program.
108. How does the Direct Entry pathway differ from the regular entry pathway?
- The Direct Entry pathway allows individuals with two years of completed undergraduate
study to enter the Diploma level directly, bypassing the Foundation level. In contrast, the regular
entry pathway typically requires completion of Foundation level courses.
109. What is the purpose of conducting the DAD qualifier exam?
- The DAD qualifier exam serves as a means to assess candidates' readiness to enter the
Diploma program directly. It evaluates their proficiency in relevant subjects and determines their
eligibility for entry.
110. Are there any specific subjects or skills candidates need to prepare for the DAD qualifier
exam?
- Yes, candidates need to prepare for subjects such as English, Mathematics, Statistics,
Aptitude, and Python programming, depending on the chosen Diploma program (DP or DS).
Preparation may include reviewing course materials, practicing sample questions, and honing
relevant skills.
111. Can candidates who fail to pass the DAD qualifier exam attempt it again?
- Yes, there is typically no limit on the number of attempts for the DAD qualifier exam.
However, candidates are encouraged to attempt the Foundation level if they do not pass the
qualifier exam.
112. What benefits do candidates gain from completing the Diploma program through Direct
Entry?
- Candidates who complete the Diploma program through Direct Entry gain specialized skills
and knowledge in programming or data science, which can enhance their career prospects and
professional development.
113. Are there any additional requirements or qualifications needed to pursue the Diploma
program through Direct Entry?

- In addition to completing two years of undergraduate study, candidates may need to meet
specific academic criteria and submit relevant documentation, such as their second-year
marksheet or higher, to qualify for Direct Entry into the Diploma program.

114. Can candidates from any academic background apply for Direct Entry into the Diploma
program?
- Yes, candidates from any academic background who have completed two years in any
undergraduate degree program are eligible to apply for Direct Entry into the Diploma program.
115. How does the Direct Entry pathway accommodate the needs of working professionals?
- The Direct Entry pathway allows working professionals to enter the Diploma program directly,
bypassing the Foundation level and saving time. This accommodates their busy schedules and
enables them to focus on advanced coursework relevant to their career goals.
116. What is the significance of the Direct Admission to Diploma (DAD) qualifier exam?
- The DAD qualifier exam serves as an assessment tool to evaluate candidates' readiness for
the Diploma program. It ensures that candidates possess the necessary knowledge and skills to
succeed at the Diploma level.
117. Are there specific dates for the DAD qualifier exam, and how often is it conducted?
- The DAD qualifier exam is typically conducted three times a year, coinciding with the end
term examinations of the IITM BS DS program. Specific dates for the exam may vary, but
candidates can expect multiple opportunities to attempt the qualifier.
118. What subjects are covered in the DAD qualifier exam, and how long does it last?
- The DAD qualifier exam covers subjects such as English, Mathematics, Statistics, Aptitude,
and Python programming, depending on the chosen Diploma program (DP or DS). The exam
duration varies, with the DP qualifier lasting three hours and the DS qualifier lasting four hours.
119. How does the Direct Entry pathway streamline the academic journey for candidates?
- By allowing candidates to enter the Diploma program directly, the Direct Entry pathway
streamlines the academic journey by eliminating the need to complete the Foundation level.
This saves time and enables candidates to focus on advanced coursework relevant to their
interests and career aspirations.
120. Are there any financial considerations for candidates applying for Direct Entry into the
Diploma program?
- Candidates may need to pay a fee to attempt the DAD qualifier exam, which varies based on
their category (GEN/OBC-CL, SC/ST/PwD, SC/ST and PwD, OBC-NCL, EWS). Additionally,
candidates should consider the overall cost of the Diploma program, including tuition fees and
any associated expenses.

Evaluation and grading of courses in every term

121. What are the different types of assessments for each course in every term?
- Each course is evaluated through three types of assessments: online weekly assignments,
monthly in-person proctored quizzes, and an in-person end term exam.
122. How are online assignments structured within a course?
- Online assignments typically span 12 weeks and require submission within specified due
dates. The average score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments should be >=
40/100 to be eligible for the final exam.
123. What is the format of the proctored quizzes, and how often are they conducted?
- Two proctored quizzes are conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8, based on the content
covered in Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively. The quizzes are in-person and typically consist of a
single session with varying time limits based on the number of subjects.
124. How are the scores from the quizzes used in the overall assessment?
- The Qualifier score is counted as Quiz 1 score for courses registered in the Foundation level
in the subsequent term of the qualifier exam. The final exam score accounts for 50% of the Total
Course Score (T), known as the End Semester Score (E).
125. What happens if a student does not attend at least one of the two proctored quizzes?
- If a student does not attend at least one of the two proctored quizzes, they may not be
eligible to write the final exam. Specific details regarding eligibility criteria should be checked in
the grading document.
126. How is eligibility determined for the end term exam?
- Eligibility criteria for the end term exam are outlined in the grading document and may vary
based on specific course requirements and performance in assignments and quizzes. Students
should refer to the grading document for detailed information.
127. Can students retake quizzes if they are not satisfied with their initial scores?

- No, there are typically no make-up quizzes provided. However, students may have the
opportunity to attempt Quiz 1 again in subsequent terms, with the better of the two scores used
for calculations.
128. How do online weekly assignments contribute to the final evaluation of a course?
- Online weekly assignments are an essential part of the course evaluation. The average
score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments should be >= 40/100 to be eligible for
the final exam. Additionally, the scores obtained in these assignments contribute to the Final
Course Score.
129. What is the purpose of the proctored quizzes conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8?
- Proctored quizzes assess students' understanding of the course material covered up to that
point. They provide an opportunity for students to demonstrate their knowledge in an in-person
setting and contribute to their overall course grade.
130. How are the time limits for proctored quizzes determined?
- The time limits for proctored quizzes vary based on the number of subjects being assessed.
Typically, a single session exam provides 4 hours for 4 subjects, 3 hours for 3 subjects, and 2
hours for 2 or 1 subject.
131. What is the significance of attending at least one of the two proctored quizzes?
- Attendance at least one of the two proctored quizzes is often mandatory for eligibility to write
the final exam. This requirement ensures that students engage with the course material and
demonstrate their understanding at key intervals throughout the term.
132. How is eligibility for the end term exam determined?
- Eligibility for the end term exam may be based on various factors, including performance in
assignments and quizzes. Specific criteria for eligibility should be outlined in the grading
document, and students are encouraged to review this information carefully.
133. What percentage of the total course score does the final end term exam contribute?
- The final end term exam typically accounts for 50% of the Total Course Score (T), also
known as the End Semester Score (E). This assessment is crucial in determining students'
overall performance in the course.

Pass criteria for each course

134. How is a candidate's performance evaluated to determine if they have passed a course?
- A candidate is deemed to have passed a course if their Total Course Score (T) is greater
than or equal to 40/100. This criterion applies uniformly to all learners in the course.
135. What grading system is used to assess a candidate's performance in a course?
- An absolute grading system is followed, where the Total Course Score (T) is used to assign a
letter grade and corresponding grade point to the candidate. The grading system is outlined in a
table based on specific score ranges.
136. Can you explain the letter grades and grade points assigned based on the Total Course
Score (T)?
- The letter grades range from S to U, corresponding to different score ranges. Each letter
grade is associated with a specific grade point, ranging from 10 for S to 0 for U.
137. What are the consequences if a candidate fails to meet the passing criteria for a course?
- If a candidate's Total Course Score (T) is below 40/100, they are assigned a grade of U,
indicating failure. Additionally, if their weekly average assignment score is less than 40/100 or
they attend 0 quizzes, they are also considered to have failed.
138. How are candidates who do not meet the passing criteria treated in subsequent terms?
- Candidates who fail or have incomplete performance in a course may have the opportunity
to complete the course in the next term. The grading document specifies the actions to be taken
based on the nature of the incomplete performance.
144. How is the distribution of grades managed within the absolute grading system?
- Grades within the absolute grading system are determined based on predefined score
ranges. The distribution of grades reflects the performance of candidates relative to these
ranges, ensuring consistency and fairness in assigning grades.
145. What factors influence the distribution of grades in a course?
- The distribution of grades in a course is primarily influenced by the performance of
candidates, as reflected in their Total Course Score (T). The predefined score ranges for each
letter grade dictate how grades are distributed across the spectrum of scores.
146. How does the grading system accommodate variations in candidate performance?

- The grading system is designed to accommodate variations in candidate performance by
assigning grades based on the Total Course Score (T). This allows for flexibility in assessing
candidates' achievements relative to the course objectives and expectations.
147. Are there any provisions for adjusting the grade distribution to account for external factors?
- The grading system typically does not include provisions for adjusting the grade distribution
based on external factors. However, academic institutions may implement policies to address
exceptional circumstances or systemic issues that impact candidate performance.
148. What measures are in place to ensure the integrity and reliability of the grade distribution
process?
- The integrity and reliability of the grade distribution process are ensured through adherence
to predefined grading criteria and rigorous assessment procedures. Transparency in grading
policies and consistent application of evaluation standards contribute to the reliability of the
process

Repeating course
149. How does the program facilitate repeating a course for improvement?
- Learners can repeat a course for improvement in grades any number of times by paying
double the regular course fee. They must submit all weekly assignments, appear for quizzes,
and take the final exams. The highest score obtained across all attempts will be used for
calculating the CGPA.
150. What are the options available for learners who were not eligible to attempt the end term
exam or did not pass the course?
- If a learner was not eligible to attempt the end term exam or did not pass the course, they
have the option to repeat the entire course. Alternatively, they can choose to reappear for the
final term exam as a makeup exam.
151. How does the makeup exam process work for learners who were absent for the final exam
alone?
- Learners who were absent for the final exam alone have two options: they can either
reappear for the final term exam as a makeup exam or repeat the entire course. The makeup
exam fee is specified, and learners can only take the makeup exam once.
152. What are the time and term limits for repeating a course?
- Learners must repeat a course within the specified time and term limits. Each level must be
completed within 36 months (3 years / 9 terms), and the entire program must be completed
within 96 months (8 years / 24 terms).
153. Can learners choose to repeat a course for improvement?

- Yes, learners can choose to repeat courses for improvement in grades. The highest grade
achieved will be recorded in the transcript. However, the course fee for repeating for
improvement will be double the normal fee.
154. What is the grading pattern for makeup exams?
- The grading pattern for makeup exams follows the formula used in the term the course work
was done, not the term the makeup exam was taken. This ensures consistency and fairness in
grading across all assessments.
155. How does the program handle learners repeating a course for improvement in grades?
- Learners can repeat a course for improvement in grades any number of times by paying
double the regular course fee. They must submit all weekly assignments, appear for quizzes,
and take the final exams. The highest grade achieved will be recorded in the transcript.
156. What options are available for learners who were not eligible to attempt the end term exam
or did not pass the course?
- If a learner was not eligible to attempt the end term exam or did not pass the course, they
have the option to repeat the entire course. Alternatively, they can choose to reappear for the
final term exam as a makeup exam.
157. Can learners choose to repeat a course for reasons other than improvement in grades?
- Yes, learners can choose to repeat a course for various reasons, such as to meet eligibility
criteria for attempting the end term exam, or if they were absent for the final exam alone.
158. How does the makeup exam process work for learners who were absent for the final exam
alone?
- Learners who were absent for the final exam alone have two options: they can either
reappear for the final term exam as a makeup exam or repeat the entire course. The makeup
exam fee is specified, and learners can only take the makeup exam once.
159. What are the time and term limits for repeating a course?
- Learners must repeat a course within the specified time and term limits. Each level must be
completed within 36 months (3 years / 9 terms), and the entire program must be completed
within 96 months (8 years / 24 terms).
160. How does the grading pattern for makeup exams ensure fairness and consistency?
- The grading pattern for makeup exams follows the formula used in the term the course work
was done, not the term the makeup exam was taken. This ensures consistency and fairness in
grading across all assessments.

161. Are there any restrictions on the number of times a learner can repeat a course?

- No, there are no restrictions on the number of times a learner can repeat a course for
improvement or other reasons.
162. Can learners choose to repeat courses across multiple terms?
- Yes, learners have the flexibility to repeat courses in a single term or across multiple terms
based on their preferences and schedule.
163. What happens if a learner chooses to repeat a course and also register for new courses in
the same term?
- Learners can repeat courses and register for new courses in the same term, but the total
number of courses must not exceed the Credit Clearing Capability (CCC) limit.
164. Is there any special process for registering for courses when repeating a course?
- Yes, learners must apply for any new course or repeat a course through the course
registration form. Simply submitting a form alone will not be accepted.
165. Can learners apply for improvement courses at different levels?
- Yes, improvement courses can be registered at any level. For example, a foundation course
improvement can be registered at the diploma level.
166. What options are available for learners who receive an incomplete (I) grade in a course?
- Learners with an incomplete grade have the option to take a makeup exam or repeat the
entire course to complete their requirements.
167. How are makeup exams scheduled, and what is their significance in the overall course
completion process?
- Makeup exams are scheduled for learners who have received an incomplete grade in a
course. They provide an opportunity for learners to reappear for the final exam and complete
the course requirements. However, makeup exams do not count towards the Credit Clearing
Capability (CCC) limit.

Exam city list
Bahrain
Manama
Kuwait
Salmiya
Oman
Muscat
Singapore

Singapore
Sri Lanka
Colombo
Jaffna
UAE
Dubai
Hamdan (AUH)
Sharjah
Andaman And Nicobar Islands
Port Blair
Andhra Pradesh
Anantapur
Bhimavaram
Guntur
Kadapa
Kurnool
Rajahmundry
Tirupathi
Vijayawada
Vishakhapatnam
Arunachal Pradesh
Naharlagun
Assam
Dibrugarh
Guwahati
Silchar
Tezpur

Bihar
Patna
Bhagalpur
Gaya
Muzaffarpur
Darbhanga
Chhattisgarh
Raipur
Delhi
Delhi
Goa
Panaji
Gujarat
Ahmedabad
Anand
Rajkot
Surat
Vadodara
Haryana
Faridabad
Gurgaon
Kurukshetra
Himachal Pradesh
Hamirpur
Shimla
Jammu and Kashmir
Jammu

Srinagar
Jharkhand
Dhanbad
Jamshedpur
Ranchi
Karnataka
Belgaum
Bengaluru
Dharwad
Gulbarga
Mangalore
Mysore
Kerala
Calicut
Ernakulam
Kollam
Kottayam
Palakkad
Thrissur
Trivandrum
Madhya Pradesh
Bhopal
Gwalior
Indore
Jabalpur
Maharashtra
Amravati

Aurangabad
Jalgaon
Kolhapur
Mumbai
Nagpur
Nanded
Nashik
Pune
Solapur
Manipur
Imphal
Meghalaya
Shillong
Mizoram
Aizawl
Nagaland
Dimapur
Odisha
Bhubaneswar
Rourkela
Sambalpur
Puducherry
Puducherry
Punjab
Chandigarh
Jalandhar
Ludhiana

Amritsar
Rajasthan
Jaipur
Jodhpur
Kota
Udaipur
Sikkim
Bardang
Tamil Nadu
Chennai-Avadi
Chennai-South
Coimbatore
Erode
Kanchipuram
Madurai
Salem
Thanjavur
Tiruchirappalli
Tirunelveli
Vellore
Telangana
Hyderabad
Warangal
Tripura
Agartala
Uttar Pradesh
Agra

Allahabad
Ghaziabad
Gorakhpur
Greater Noida
Kanpur
Lucknow
Meerut
Varanasi
Uttarakhand
Dehradun
Haldwani
Roorkee
West Bengal
Aasansol
Adisaptagram
Durgapur
Kolkata
Siliguri

Term structure
168. How is the academic year structured in terms of terms and durations?
- The academic year is divided into three terms: January Term, May Term, and September
Term, each lasting four months.
169. How many weeks of coursework are included in each term?
- Each term consists of 12 weeks of coursework, which includes video lectures and
assignments for the enrolled courses.
170. What types of assessments are conducted during the term?
- Assessments during the term may include in-person invigilated quizzes, programming
exams, mini projects, vivas, take-home assignments, and other relevant evaluations, depending
on the nature of the course.

171. How are the in-person invigilated quizzes scheduled within the term?
- Two in-person invigilated quizzes are scheduled during the term, typically at the end of
Weeks 4 and 8, covering the content from the preceding weeks.
172. What is the purpose of the end-of-term exams?
- The end-of-term exams are comprehensive assessments conducted at the conclusion of
each term to evaluate the learners' understanding of the course materials covered throughout
the term.
173. Are there specific dates for the commencement and conclusion of each term?
- Yes, specific dates for the start and end of each term are provided to ensure proper planning
and scheduling for learners and instructors alike.
174. How are the term durations aligned with the calendar year?
- The term durations are structured to align with the calendar year, with the January Term
starting at the beginning of the year, the May Term starting in May, and the September Term
commencing in September.
175. Can students enroll in courses across multiple terms?
- Yes, students have the flexibility to enroll in courses across multiple terms based on their
academic plans and schedules.
176. Are there any breaks or holidays within each term?
- Typically, breaks or holidays within each term are not explicitly mentioned. However, learners
may refer to the academic calendar for any scheduled breaks or holidays, if applicable.
177. How do instructors manage coursework and assessments throughout the term?
- Instructors design and deliver coursework and assessments over the 12-week duration of
the term, ensuring a balanced distribution of learning activities and evaluation tasks.
178. What is the significance of the term structure in academic planning?
- The term structure provides a framework for organizing and delivering educational content
and assessments within defined timeframes, facilitating effective academic planning and
progression.
179. Are there any provisions for adjusting the term structure in exceptional circumstances?
- In exceptional circumstances, such as unforeseen events or emergencies, adjustments to
the term structure may be made to accommodate the needs of learners and ensure continuity in
academic activities.

Frequently Asked Questions on iit m website

Does IIT Madras offer B.Sc in Programming & Data Science on-campus?
No, there is no equivalent on-campus version. IIT Madras has carefully curated this
exclusively as an online program.
Will those enrolled to this program have access to IIT Madras campus facilities?
Due to limitations of campus facilities and students being spread out geographically,
learners enrolled in the program will not have access to IITM campus facilities.
What is the language of instruction for these courses? Are they available in other
regional languages?
All our program courses are taught in English. Hence, we expect a minimum
proficiency in English language to participate in the program.
I am a CA / B.Com Graduate / Lawyer / B.Sc Graduate / Mechanical engineer / MBBS
student and do not have any knowledge of coding. Does this course cover the basics of
coding before progressing to advanced levels?
It is not necessary to have a prior knowledge of coding to learn from our program. Our
program is structured in such a way that once a learner starts from the Foundational
level and progresses towards the Degree level, in sequence, he / she will obtain
sufficient proficiency in Programming and Data Science.
How long will it take to complete the online degree program if I am working?
The full program can take anywhere between 3 and 6 years to complete. On an
average, we anticipate that a learner studying part time will finish the degree in 4 to 5
years. While this is the estimated time for the full degree, a diploma can potentially be
obtained faster (around 8 months - 2 years). Check Academics page to better
understand the program structure.
What are the technological requirements for this program?
Access to good internet connection as well as a laptop / desktop device will be a key
requirement to learn effectively from our courses. Familiarity with Google tools would be
an advantage.
Will the classes be taught live? Will there be any interaction?
No. Pre-recorded lessons and assignments will be made available on our portal on a
weekly basis. Learners can learn from the content released each week at their own
pace, but will be required to submit the weekly assignments online within stipulated
deadlines.

One or two LIVE sessions per course may be conducted to clear doubts and interact
with the course instructor and course support team.
What is the overall structure of the program? What are Levels?
The program is split into three levels that have to be done strictly in sequence:
1: Foundational Level (8 courses)
2: Diploma Level (6 Programming courses + 6 Data Science courses)
3: Degree Level (11 courses)
Check Overall Structure in Academics page.
How much time do I need to spend on a course per day?
The expected effort to do well in one course is about 10 hours per week.
How many courses can I complete in a year?
There are 3 terms in a year. Learner may be allowed to register for a maximum of 2 - 4
courses in a term depending on their performance in previous exams and their preferred
pace of learning.
Note that all courses of one level need to be completed before registering for courses in
the next level, and all prerequisites of a course need to be completed before registering
for that course.
How / where do I ask questions or doubts related to the course content of the program?
Each course page will have a discussion forum where learners can raise their
course-related questions and interact with the course instructor or course support team.
For all questions not related to the course, you may write to
support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in

Are there any communication groups on WhatsApp, Telegram etc for the IITM Online
Degree Program?
We have NOT created any official groups anywhere yet. We currently answer all
questions / doubts via support email / calls.
We have plans to create official groups for our learners when the qualifier month starts.
We will reach out to you through whatsapp, email and SMS. Kindly look out for
communication from our side on this.

Are there any sample video content or assignments?
As a sample, Week 1 content videos have been made available for the first four
Foundational Level courses for you to try and learn from. We recommend you to check
out these lectures and try the sample assignment we have put out for each course. The
links to Week 1 Content & Assignment pages can be accessed from the Foundational
Level courses section in Academics page.
I ran into an error or issue in the application form. What do I do?
Please send us your registered email ID and a screenshot of the error / issue with
relevant description to support@onlinedegeree.iitm.ac.in
If the error is after payment has been made, please forward the confirmation email from
Razorpay along with email ID, application number and screenshot with description.

Is there an attendance policy for this program?
There is no daily attendance, but once you register for the courses, submission of
weekly assignment is taken as an attendance indicator. Minimum required scores in
weekly assignments of a course will determine if a learner will be allowed to write the
end term exam for that course or not.
Can I take my exams from home?
No. Every term will have 3 quizzes and an end term exam for each course. All quizzes
and end term exams will be in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across
the country. You need to travel to the exam centre and take these exams. Check Exam
Cities in Academics Page.
What is a quiz?
A quiz is similar or equivalent to a monthly test in schools and colleges. Marks obtained
in quizzes count towards the total score obtained in the course. All quizzes will be
in-person, invigilated exams at designated centres across the country.
Are the exam dates flexible?
No, the exam dates are not flexible. The quiz and end term exam dates are fixed for all
learners taking the same course in a term. We try our best to schedule all exams during
the weekends though it may not be possible for every exam.
What if I want to request for a city not listed in the current list of exam cities?

If the city of your choice is not in our current exam cities list, please send an email to
support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in. We will consider your request, but there is no
guarantee that we will add it.
Will there be multiple exam centres within an exam city? How many?
There may be more than one exam centre in any exam city. The count depends on the
number of learners in each city and availability of centres on given date with our exam
partner.
When will the term start? What is the timeline?
Learners who clear the Qualifier Exam will be expected to register for the program right
after their results are announced. In the first term alone, classes start (with week 5)
immediately after the completion of week 4 in the qualifier phase with no gap. Please
check Important Dates in Admissions page to get to know the timeline.
Can I pursue only a Diploma instead of Degree?
Learners who join the IIT Madras Online Degree Program have the option of exiting the
program earlier with a Diploma in Programming AND / OR Diploma in Data Science.
Learners who wish to exclusively pursue a Diploma in Programming OR Data Science
alone and already have a basic understanding of the foundations can check out IIT
Madras Diploma Program website.
What is the eligibility criteria to apply for the Degree Program?
Check Eligibility section in Admissions page for the latest update of the eligibility
criteria.
Is the program available to students currently in class 12 or equivalent?
Students currently in class 12 (or equivalent) will be allowed to apply for the program,
go through the qualifier phase and write the qualifier exam, but will not be allowed to
register for the foundational level of the program until they clear class 12 (or equivalent).
Note that a Qualifier Exam result is valid only for 3 terms (about 1 year) right after the
exam. So, plan accordingly.
I took a break year after class 12 to prepare for JEE / NEET. Can I Apply for the
Program?
Yes, you may apply for the Program if you have studied Mathematics & English in class
10 and have cleared class 12 or equivalent.
I had dropped out of degree over two decades ago. Would I be eligible to apply?

Yes. If you cleared class 12 or equivalent in 2019 or earlier, you may apply for our
program - there is no requirement to have completed a degree program. Check our
latest eligibility criteria.
How and where can I apply for the program?
Anyone who is eligible may apply by filling in the application form, uploading required
documents and paying the application fee.
We recommend that you go through the Academics Page to better understand the
program and the Admissions Page to understand the admission process before
applying.

What is the qualifier process?
All applicants will have to go through a Qualifier Process, like a trial month, wherein
they will get access to 4 weeks of content for the four foundational level courses English I, Mathematics for Data Science I, Statistics for Data Science I and
Computational Thinking. Check Qualifier Process in Admissions page
Will everyone who goes through the qualifier process be allowed to write the qualifier
exam? What is the passing criteria?
No. Only the learners who get the minimum required marks in the online assignments
during the qualifier process of 4 weeks will allowed to attend the qualifier exam. Only
those learners allowed to write the qualifier exam shall be provided with hall tickets.
Refer to Qualifier Process and the section below it to learn about the minimum required
marks in the qualifier assignments and minimum required marks to pass / clear the
qualifier exam.
How long is the qualifier exam result valid for? Can I join the program at a later term if I
clear the qualifier exam now?
The Qualifier Exam result is valid for a period of 3 terms (or 1 year). So, a learner may
choose to not register for Foundational Level immediately after clearing the Qualifier
Exam and register for the Foundational level in the second or third term following the
Qualifier Exam.
How many times a year will there be admissions? Will it be only once a year?
For now, we are running applications / admissions thrice a year.
What are the documents / files required to apply for the qualifier process of the
program?

The list of required documents is available on the Application Process section of the
admissions page.
Can the credits from this online degree program be transferred to learner's college or
university (like on the NPTEL platform)?
IITM's Online BSc Degree in Programming and Data Science is a stand alone program.
Credits cannot be transferred.
Will IIT Madras provide the course material for the program in hard copy through courier
(like IGNOU)?
No, the course content will be provided only in online mode so you can watch them
anytime, anywhere. There will be no hard copy provided. Depending on the course,
learners may be recommended reference books / material that they may buy separately.
Can I submit an older version of the OBC-NCL / EWS certificate while applying or
registering for courses?
Student has to submit valid certificates while applying / registering. These will be
verified by our team. An approved certificate will be valid for three terms.
After applying, can I get a refund of application fee if I can't write the qualifier exam or if
I fail the qualifier exam?
No. There will be no refund of application fee once paid.
After registering for a course in a term, can I carry over the fees to the next term if I am
not able to complete the course?
No. A course registration is valid only for one term. If a learner is not able to clear a
course in a term, they will be considered as having failed the course and will need to
register for the course again at a later term along with the required fee.
Note that a learner will be allowed to drop off from a course within the first four weeks of
the term. In such cases, a part of the course fee will be retained as admin charges and
the balance, if any, may be carried over to the next term.
What is the Fee structure? Should we submit the entire fees at once or in installments?
The overall program fees will not be paid at one stretch. The actual fees you will be
paying in each term will be in proportion to the number of courses you register for in the
respective term. So, if you register for 2 courses in a term, you have to pay the fees only
for those 2 courses. For more details, please refer to Fee Structure in Academics Page.
What is the mode of payment?
Fees can be paid only through online mode. Fees through DD will not be accepted.

Note that payment cannot be made using Debit Card. You can pay using any Credit
Card, Netbanking (all Indian Banks), Wallet, UPI (Google Pay, BHIM, etc.).

Will I get any confirmation on successful payment of fee?
Yes. After successful completion of payment, you will receive a confirmation email from
Razorpay.

If my payment fails, how many days will it take to the money back in my bank account?
In case of failed payments, it will take 3 to 4 weeks for the money to be credited back in
your bank account.

Can I edit my application form after submitting it?
Your application form will be considered as submitted only upon making the application
fee payment. Until then, you may edit the contents of your application form. After the
application fee has been paid, you will not be allowed to edit the application form.
In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verification, you will
be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline.

My application status says "Verification Under Process". How long will it take for my
application to be verified?
Verification of documents may take upto 3 weeks. Please be patient. We will keep you
updated about your application status by email / SMS.
How to avoid getting my application "returned / rejected"?
After you submit your application, we verify the same before changing the status of
uploaded document(s) to "accepted" or "returned / rejected".
Be careful when filling the application form and double check the information you enter.
We verify the files / documents you have uploaded (photograph, signature, ID card, SC /
ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD document if applicable). If any of the files / documents
uploaded is unclear or broken or found to be wrong or incorrect, your application may
be "returned / rejected".
In case your uploaded document(s) gets "returned / rejected" during verfication, you will
be given a chance to re-upload a valid document within a stipulated deadline.

Being honest and careful while filling the application form and uploading correct
documents in the correct formats will help get your application "accepted". Check
Application Process for required documents, document formats and sizes.
Can I select only one city as my Exam City instead of selecting two preferences?
No. You will need to pick two different preferences for exam cities in the order of your
preference. Your exam centre shall be allotted in any one of the two exam cities picked
depending on availability. We recommend that you familiarise with the current available
Exam City options to be able to pick your preferred exam cities.
Can I change my exam cities for the qualifier exam after having paid and submitted my
application?
You will not be allowed to change your exam city for the qualifier exam after submitting
your preferences in the application form.
If there is any unavoidable situation because of which you need to have the qualifier
exam city changed, please write to us. We will try to accommodate your request based
on availability, but cannot guarantee a change of exam city.
Will the Exam City preferences I select for the Qualifier Exam in the application form be
fixed for all the later exams?
No. The Exam city preferences selected in the application form is for the Qualifier
Exam only. You will have the option of picking a different set of Exam City options, if you
wish, after qualifying for the later invigilated exams.
Will I get a scholarship / loan for this programme?
We are trying to see if this is possible. Please watch out for announcements regarding
scholarships / loans.

Is there any concession for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates in terms of
scores?
SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS /PwD candidates will have concession in minimum scores
required during the qualifier process to enter the program. Check out Qualifier Process
in Admissions page. Note that there will be no such concessions after entering the
program. (OBC candidates not belonging to the OBC-NCL category cannot avail any
concession)
Is there any fee waiver for SC / ST / OBC-NCL / EWS / PwD candidates or candidates
with lower family income?

Only SC / ST / PwD candidates may avail fee waivers in the application stage. After
clearing the qualifier process and exam, candidates belonging to any category (General
/ OBC / EWS / SC / ST / PwD) may avail fee waivers in course fees based on family
income. Check Fee Structure in Academics page for details.
What does "family income" in the fee structure mean?
The term family income for the purpose of availing fee waivers includes the income of
the candidate, the income of his/her parents and spouse, also the income of his/her
siblings and children below the age of 18 years.
After clearing the Qualifier Exam, all learners who wish to avail fee waivers based on
Family Income required to submit Family Income Certificate in the format provided in
the Fee Structure section. Note that the Family Income Certificates are valid only for
one year and will need to be submitted afresh each year to continue availing fee waiver
based on Family Income through the program.

I belong to the general category and I want to avail fee waiver since my family income in
below 5 lakhs per annum. Why do I need to submit EWS + Family Income Certificate to
avail the waiver?
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in India, as defined by the Govt. of India, is a
sub-category of people belonging to the General category with an annual family income
less than ₹8 lakhs per annum and who do not belong to any category such as
SC/ST/OBC. Course fee waivers from IIT Madras are available for general category
learners with family income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum. As per the policy of IIT
Madras, and as part of our documentation process to ensure that we give fee waiver
benefits to the deserving learners, we require general category learners with family
income less than ₹5 lakhs per annum to submit both EWS certificate and Family Income
certificate. EWS and Family Income certificates will need to be obtained in the format
mentioned in the Fee Structure section in Academics page.
Will students who enter the program have internship / recruitment opportunities
provided by IIT Madras?
We will try to make internship / recruitment opportunities available to learners; we will
notify learners when the opportunities arise.
How does IIT Madras plan to provide placements for lakhs of applicants?
A large number of learners apply and participate in the qualifier process. After clearing
the qualifier process, learners will need to clear foundational level courses, diploma
level courses and then the degree level courses to finally get a BSc degree from IIT

Madras. That's a total of 31 courses of IIT standard and 116 course credits. When a
student is able to successfully clear these courses and fulfill all the academic
requirements, we are confident that the students will be employable.
Do I get placement opportunities after I complete the BSc Degree?
The demand for data analysts / scientists and full stack developers is very high.
Through our program, we do our best to equip our learners with required subject
expertise. We are also planning to give soft skills training as part of the program. It is all
about enabling IITM BSc graduates with the right job opportunities. IIT Madras will
actively reach out to the recruiters in the context of placement opportunities for the
graduates of the Online BSc Degree Program.
What is the registration process for the Foundational Level?
Once you clear the Qualifier Exam, you will be allowed to access the Course
Registration Form from your dashboard upon logging in. In the Course Registration
Form, you will need to fill the required details, upload necessary documents and pay the
course fee to register for the first term of your Foundational Level. You may choose to
register for one or more Foundational Level courses with the upper limit of courses you
can register for depending on your Qualifier Exam Score.
Note that there will be an added Exam Fee applicable for learners opting to write their
quizzes and end term exams outside India.
What are the documents / files that are required to be uploaded while registering for the
Foundational Level?
It is mandatory any one of these documents while registering for Foundational Level:
- 12th or equivalent mark sheet OR
- Degree Certificate OR
- Certificate of the highest level of education

What are the documents needed to avail fee waiver at Foundational Level and later?
Please refer to the Fee Structure section in the Academics page to see which fee
waiver may be applicable to you and the relevant documents / certificates that will need
to be submitted.

I have already submitted my category certificate while applying for the Qualifier
Process. Do I need to submit them again while registering for the Foundational Level?

No, not required to submit again. However, the EWS / OBC-NCL certificate need to be
submitted again if the previously submitted certificate is not valid until the end of the
current financial year.

I can't afford to pay the entire Foundational Level fees at one shot and I do not come
under any fee waiver category too, can I pay the fees in 2 or 3 installments?
Please be informed that you will not be paying the entire Program fee or Foundational
Level fee at one stretch. The actual fees you will be paying will be in proportion to the
number of courses you register for in every term. So, if you register for 2 courses in the
January 2021 Term, you have to pay the course fees only for those 2 courses.
In the Fee Structure section, select your goal to be able to see a detailed PDF with
break down of course fee over each term.

Can I change my email ID in the Foundational Level? Will we get any official student
email ID?
The personal email ID you applied for the program with cannot be changed. This email
ID is used to access the whole Qualifier Process and the Foundational Level Course
Registration Form.
Once all the documents uploaded in the Foundational Level Course Registration Form
are approved, each registered learner will be assigned a roll number and a
corresponding official IIT Madras Online Degree student email ID. After that, all further
communication and course access will be through the official student email ID.

Is it possible to get an educational loan for this Program?
We are working on the process of getting the bank loans approved for this Program.
Please do look out for updates from our side on this.
Will I be given a new portal to access courses at Foundational Level?
No, the current portal will be used for all the Levels. You will be given a new official
IITM Online Degree student email ID to access the portal.

Will I be issued an ID card?
An ID card in electronic format will be provided, subject to conditions on use of ID card.

Can I take a break of 1 or 2 year(s) after completing the Foundational Level?

The BSc Degree has to be completed within a maximum period of 6 years. While a 1 or
2 year break between Levels is allowed, we recommend that you time the length of your
breaks depending on whether you want to pursue a Diploma or Degree, and how many
courses you are able to take up in a term.
I am unable to attend the Qualifier Exam but received hall ticket / I didn't clear the
Qualifier Exam. What will be the procedure to re-apply? Do I need to pay application fee
again?
You can re-apply again for the immediate next Qualifier Process with partial application
fee payment. Your previous assignment scores will be considered and you will be
directly eligible to write the Qualifier Exam without having to submit assignments again.
I applied for the Qualifer Exam but I didn't obtain the minimum required average
assignment scores to take Qualifier Exam, and hence didn't receive any hall ticket for
the same. What will be the procedure to re-apply?
You have to re-apply as a new applicant with payment of full application fee.

I'm eligible to apply 4 courses in the upcoming term, but I have only 2 Foundational
Level courses left to complete. Will I be allowed to register for Diploma Level courses
along with the Foundational Level courses?
No, you have to complete all the 8 courses in Foundation Level before enrolling to the
Diploma Level courses.

What is the eligiblity to write the End Term Exam for a course?
To be eligible to write the End Term Exam for a course, it is mandatory for the learner to
have (i) obtained in the course an Average Assignment Score >= 40/100 AND (ii)
appeared for at least one out of the three proctored in-person Quizzes.
Learners who are not eligible to write a specific course's End Term Exam will not be
issued hall ticket for the same. They will have to repeat the entire course including
assignments and quizzes in a later term.

Is it mandatory to take the proctored in-person Quizzes?
It is mandatory to attempt at least one of the three proctored in-person quizzes in a
term to be eligible to appear for the End Term Exams.

Will Qualifier phase assignment scores be included while calculating the eligilibity for
the End Term?
For the courses you register for immediately after clearing your Qualifier Exam, yes,
your Qualifier phase assignment scores will be included while calculating eligibility for
the End Term Exam.
For courses that you register for in a later term, you will be required to repeat the
assignments completed in the Qualifier phase.

Will my Qualifier Exam Score be considered in the subsequent term?
The Qualifier Exam Score will be counted as Quiz 1 Score for the courses registered in
the Foundation level in the term immediately after the Qualifier exam.

What will happen if I am absent for an End Term Exam?
Learner has two options:
1. Register for the course in the subsequent term with the option of taking the End Term
Exam alone and by paying a reduced fee (Rs.1000 per Foundational Level course and
Rs.2000 per Diploma / Degree Level Course).
2. Repeat the entire course (including assignments and quizzes) by paying the full
course fee.

What is the procedure to add / drop a course?
Once the registration window closes in any term, adding courses will not be allowed.
Dropping a course will be allowed within 4 weeks of the term start.

Can I get a refund if I drop a course within the first four weeks of the term start?
For courses dropped within the first four weeks of the term, admin charges will be
retained and the balance course fee, if any, will be refunded. Admin charges for a
Foundational Level course is Rs.2000 and the admin charges for a Diploma / Degree
Level course is Rs.4000.
For learners who registered to take exams outside India, 50% of End Term Exam Fee
for the dropped course will be refunded. If such a learner chooses to drop all courses in
a term, 50% of Quiz 2 & Quiz 3 fee will also be refunded.

For more details, please refer to the operations document shared with registered
students named "Part II - Foundation + Diploma" under section "13.7. Dropping a
Course".

Is it possible to repeat a course for improving grades?
Though it is not recommended, a learner may choose to repeat a course for improving
grades any number of times. The course fee for repeating a course will be twice the
regular course fee and the learner will have to submit the online graded weekly
assignments, appear for the Quiz(zes) and End Term Exam.
The highest score among all attempts of a course will be used for calculating the CGPA.

What is the procedure to change exam city from UAE to India / India to UAE?
Please send an email to support@onlinedegree.iitm.ac.in

How can I change the exam city within India?
Each exam has a deadline before which change of exam city is allowed. Option to
change the exam city will be available till each deadline in the student Dashboard, in the
"Exam Cities and Hall Tickets" page.

S.
No
.

Questions

Answer
JEE Based Entry

1

2

3

What is the application fees for JEE Based
Entry?

The fees for JEE-Based Entry are the same as for
regular entry, with the amount being Rs. 3000.

You'll need to provide your JEE Mains Result as
What are the documents required for JEE Based
one of the required documents, and you can also
Entry?
proceed with your JEE Advanced Registration.
How many course can be registered in JEE
Based Entry?

Depending on the amount of time you plan to
dedicate to studying, you can register for 1, 2, 3,

or 4 courses.

4

What is the difference between Regular Entry &
JEE Based Entry?

The distinction between these entries lies in the
selection process. With regular entry, you're
required to choose 4 subjects. Conversely, with
JEE-based entry, you have the flexibility to select
the number of courses you wish to study
according to your convenience.

5

When is the registration period for the courses
available?

IITM will notify you about the course selection
once your registration fee has been paid.

When do we qualify for JEE-Based Entry?

You become eligible to register for JEE-Based
Entry once you have cleared the cutoff for JEE
Mains.

6

7

When will we gain access to the content?

Access to the content will be granted only after
you have registered for the courses. Furthermore,
for an early trial, you can access Ace Grade
lectures corresponding to your selected subjects.

8

What happens after joining through JEE-Based
Entry?

After entry, you can continue this program as a
regular student.

9

Is it possible to enroll in another college after
participating in JEE-Based Entry?

Yes! You can continue with this program even if
you enroll in another college or pursue a different
degree.

10

What will occur if my JEE entry document is
invalid?

If the proof document submitted is deemed
invalid, the student will be reclassified into the
non-JEE category and will be treated as a regular
entry candidate at the foundation level. They will
then have to undergo the qualifier process.

11

Is there any fee waiver for JEE-qualified
students?

No, there is no fee waiver for JEE-qualified
students. Fee waivers will be provided based on
your reservation category and annual income.

12

What is CCC in this course?

The CCC (Credit Clearing Capability), It indicates
the number of courses you can join.

13

What is starting CCC foe JEE Based Student?

Initially, the CCC for JEE-Based students is 4.

14

Does it remain at 4 for every term?

No, it will depend on your performance regarding
how many courses you can join.

15

How do I complete the application form for the
program?

You can find the application form on IIT M official
Website.

What is the process for paying the admission fee
16
of Rs 3000?

The admission fee of Rs 3000 can be paid
through the payment options available on IITM
Website, such as credit/debit card, UPI or online
banking.

17

Once you have completed the application form
and paid the admission fee, you need to submit

How do I verify my proof for JEE Based Entry?

proof of your qualification for JEE Advanced, such
as your JEE Advanced admit card or result.
Can you provide more details about the
foundation level courses that I'll be starting?

The foundation level courses include English 1,
Maths 1, Statistics 1, and Computational Thinking,
designed to provide you with a strong base for
your academic journey.

19

How do I register for the courses (English 1,
Maths 1, Statistics 1, Computational Thinking)?

You can register for the courses by logging into
your account on IITM website and following the
registration process, which includes selecting the
courses you wish to enroll in and paying the
respective course fees.

20

Is there flexibility in the number of courses I can Yes, depending on the time you have available for
register for, based on my schedule?
studying, you can register for 1, 2, 3, or 4 courses.

18

What kind of content will I have access to once I
21
register for the courses?

After you register for the courses, you will gain
access to the course materials, lectures, and
other educational content relevant to your
selected courses.

22

How does the program accommodate students
who may join another college or pursue a
different degree?

IITM program is designed to be flexible, allowing
you to continue your studies even if you join
another college or pursue a different degree. You
can manage your coursework alongside your
other academic commitments.

23

What is the duration of the direct entry
opportunity for students who have qualified for
the JEE Mains Exams?

The direct entry opportunity is valid for the 3 terms
following the release of the JEE Advanced
Eligibility list.

24

What does it mean to be issued the admission
letter, and what information does it contain?

The admission letter confirms your eligibility for
the program and contains important details such
as your student ID, course registration
instructions, and other relevant information

25

How does being categorized as a non-JEE
student affect my access to the program's
resources and courses?

As a non-JEE student, you will need to go through
the qualifier process and may have different
access privileges compared to JEE-qualified
students. This may affect your course registration
and other program resources.

S.
No
.

Questions

Answer
JEE Based Entry

1

What is the application fees for JEE Based
Entry?

The fees for JEE-Based Entry are the same as for
regular entry, with the amount being Rs. 3000.

2

You'll need to provide your JEE Mains Result as
What are the documents required for JEE Based
one of the required documents, and you can also
Entry?
proceed with your JEE Advanced Registration.
How many course can be registered in JEE
Based Entry?

Depending on the amount of time you plan to
dedicate to studying, you can register for 1, 2, 3,
or 4 courses.

4

What is the difference between Regular Entry &
JEE Based Entry?

The distinction between these entries lies in the
selection process. With regular entry, you're
required to choose 4 subjects. Conversely, with
JEE-based entry, you have the flexibility to select
the number of courses you wish to study
according to your convenience.

5

When is the registration period for the courses
available?

IITM will notify you about the course selection
once your registration fee has been paid.

When do we qualify for JEE-Based Entry?

You become eligible to register for JEE-Based
Entry once you have cleared the cutoff for JEE
Mains.

3

6

7

When will we gain access to the content?

Access to the content will be granted only after
you have registered for the courses. Furthermore,
for an early trial, you can access Ace Grade
lectures corresponding to your selected subjects.

8

What happens after joining through JEE-Based
Entry?

After entry, you can continue this program as a
regular student.

9

Is it possible to enroll in another college after
participating in JEE-Based Entry?

Yes! You can continue with this program even if
you enroll in another college or pursue a different
degree.

10

What will occur if my JEE entry document is
invalid?

If the proof document submitted is deemed
invalid, the student will be reclassified into the
non-JEE category and will be treated as a regular
entry candidate at the foundation level. They will
then have to undergo the qualifier process.

11

Is there any fee waiver for JEE-qualified
students?

No, there is no fee waiver for JEE-qualified
students. Fee waivers will be provided based on
your reservation category and annual income.

12

What is CCC in this course?

The CCC (Credit Clearing Capability), It indicates
the number of courses you can join.

13

What is starting CCC foe JEE Based Student?

Initially, the CCC for JEE-Based students is 4.

14

Does it remain at 4 for every term?

No, it will depend on your performance regarding
how many courses you can join.

15

How do I complete the application form for the
program?

You can find the application form on IIT M official
Website.

16 What is the process for paying the admission fee

The admission fee of Rs 3000 can be paid

of Rs 3000?

through the payment options available on IITM
Website, such as credit/debit card, UPI or online
banking.

How do I verify my proof for JEE Based Entry?

Once you have completed the application form
and paid the admission fee, you need to submit
proof of your qualification for JEE Advanced, such
as your JEE Advanced admit card or result.

Can you provide more details about the
foundation level courses that I'll be starting?

The foundation level courses include English 1,
Maths 1, Statistics 1, and Computational Thinking,
designed to provide you with a strong base for
your academic journey.

19

How do I register for the courses (English 1,
Maths 1, Statistics 1, Computational Thinking)?

You can register for the courses by logging into
your account on IITM website and following the
registration process, which includes selecting the
courses you wish to enroll in and paying the
respective course fees.

20

Is there flexibility in the number of courses I can Yes, depending on the time you have available for
register for, based on my schedule?
studying, you can register for 1, 2, 3, or 4 courses.

17

18

What kind of content will I have access to once I
21
register for the courses?

After you register for the courses, you will gain
access to the course materials, lectures, and
other educational content relevant to your
selected courses.

22

How does the program accommodate students
who may join another college or pursue a
different degree?

IITM program is designed to be flexible, allowing
you to continue your studies even if you join
another college or pursue a different degree. You
can manage your coursework alongside your
other academic commitments.

23

What is the duration of the direct entry
opportunity for students who have qualified for
the JEE Mains Exams?

The direct entry opportunity is valid for the 3 terms
following the release of the JEE Advanced
Eligibility list.

24

What does it mean to be issued the admission
letter, and what information does it contain?

The admission letter confirms your eligibility for
the program and contains important details such
as your student ID, course registration
instructions, and other relevant information

25

How does being categorized as a non-JEE
student affect my access to the program's
resources and courses?

As a non-JEE student, you will need to go through
the qualifier process and may have different
access privileges compared to JEE-qualified
students. This may affect your course registration
and other program resources.

Evaluation and grading of courses in every term

121. What are the different types of assessments for each course in every term?
- Each course is evaluated through three types of assessments: online weekly assignments,
monthly in-person proctored quizzes, and an in-person end term exam.
122. How are online assignments structured within a course?
- Online assignments typically span 12 weeks and require submission within specified due
dates. The average score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments should be >=
40/100 to be eligible for the final exam.
123. What is the format of the proctored quizzes, and how often are they conducted?
- Two proctored quizzes are conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8, based on the content
covered in Weeks 1-4 and 1-8 respectively. The quizzes are in-person and typically consist of a
single session with varying time limits based on the number of subjects.
124. How are the scores from the quizzes used in the overall assessment?
- The Qualifier score is counted as Quiz 1 score for courses registered in the Foundation level
in the subsequent term of the qualifier exam. The final exam score accounts for 50% of the Total
Course Score (T), known as the End Semester Score (E).
125. What happens if a student does not attend at least one of the two proctored quizzes?
- If a student does not attend at least one of the two proctored quizzes, they may not be
eligible to write the final exam. Specific details regarding eligibility criteria should be checked in
the grading document.
126. How is eligibility determined for the end term exam?
- Eligibility criteria for the end term exam are outlined in the grading document and may vary
based on specific course requirements and performance in assignments and quizzes. Students
should refer to the grading document for detailed information.
127. Can students retake quizzes if they are not satisfied with their initial scores?
- No, there are typically no make-up quizzes provided. However, students may have the
opportunity to attempt Quiz 1 again in subsequent terms, with the better of the two scores used
for calculations.
128. How do online weekly assignments contribute to the final evaluation of a course?
- Online weekly assignments are an essential part of the course evaluation. The average
score of the best 5 out of the first 9 weekly assignments should be >= 40/100 to be eligible for
the final exam. Additionally, the scores obtained in these assignments contribute to the Final
Course Score.
129. What is the purpose of the proctored quizzes conducted at the end of Weeks 4 and 8?

- Proctored quizzes assess students' understanding of the course material covered up to that
point. They provide an opportunity for students to demonstrate their knowledge in an in-person
setting and contribute to their overall course grade.
130. How are the time limits for proctored quizzes determined?
- The time limits for proctored quizzes vary based on the number of subjects being assessed.
Typically, a single session exam provides 4 hours for 4 subjects, 3 hours for 3 subjects, and 2
hours for 2 or 1 subject.
131. What is the significance of attending at least one of the two proctored quizzes?
- Attendance at least one of the two proctored quizzes is often mandatory for eligibility to write
the final exam. This requirement ensures that students engage with the course material and
demonstrate their understanding at key intervals throughout the term.
132. How is eligibility for the end term exam determined?
- Eligibility for the end term exam may be based on various factors, including performance in
assignments and quizzes. Specific criteria for eligibility should be outlined in the grading
document, and students are encouraged to review this information carefully.
133. What percentage of the total course score does the final end term exam contribute?
- The final end term exam typically accounts for 50% of the Total Course Score (T), also
known as the End Semester Score (E). This assessment is crucial in determining students'
overall performance in the course.
